The Project Gutenberg EBook of In Illud: Omnia mihi tradita sunt a Patre, by 
Saint Athanasius Archbishop of Alexandria

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: In Illud: Omnia mihi tradita sunt a Patre
       A Homily on Matthew 11:27

Author: Saint Athanasius Archbishop of Alexandria

Release Date: October 6, 2011 [EBook #37641]

Language: Greek

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IN ILLUD: OMNIA MIHI TRADITA ***




Produced by Michael Gray, Diocese of San Jose




In Illud: Omnia mihi tradita sunt a Patre

A Homily on Matthew 11:27

In Latin and the Original Greek


By Saint Athanasius

Bishop of Alexandria
Doctor of the Church
Who Attended the First Council of Nicaea
And Fought Courageously Against the Arian Heresy



ΕΙΣ ΤΟ,

_Πάντα μοι παρεδόθη ὑπὸ τοῦ Πατρός μου, καὶ οὐδεὶς
γινώσκει [1], τίς ἐστιν ὁ Υἱὸς εἰ μὴ ὁ Πατήρ· καὶ τίς
ἐστιν ὁ Πατὴρ εἰ μὴ ὁ Υἱὸς, καὶ ᾧ ἐὰν βούληται ὁ Υἱὸς
ἀποκαλῦψαι._

1. Καὶ τοῦτο οὐ νοήσαντες οἱ τῆς αἱρέσεως Ἀρείου
Εὐσέβιός τε καὶ οἱ σὺν αὐτῷ, ἀσεβοῦσιν εἰς τὸν Κύριον·
φασὶ γάρ· Εἰ τὰ πάντα παρεδόθη (_πάντα_ λέγοντες τὴν
κυριότητα τῆς κτίσεως), ἦν ποτε, ὅτε οὐκ εἶχεν αὐτά. Εἰ
δὲ οὐκ εἶχεν, οὐκ ἔστιν ἐκ τοῦ Πατρός· Εἰ γὰρ ἦν, εἶχεν
ἂν αὐτὰ ἀεὶ ἐξ αὐτοῦ ὤν, καὶ χρείαν οὐκ εἶχε τοῦ λαβεῖν
αὐτά. Ἀλλὰ καὶ [2] ἐκ τούτου μᾶλλον ἡ ἄνοια αὐτῶν
ἐλεγχθήσεται. Οὐ γὰρ τοῦ ἄρχειν τῆς κτίσεως, ἢ τοῦ
ἐπιστατεῖν τῶν ποιημάτων, σημαντικόν ἐστι τὸ ῥητὸν,
ἀλλά τινα νοῦν τῆς οἰκονομίας δηλῶσαι θέλει. Εἰ γὰρ,
ὅτε ἔλεγε, παρεδόθη αὐτῷ, δῆλον [3] ὅτι πρὸ τοῦ λάβῃ,
κενὴ ἦν ἡ κτίσις τοῦ Λόγου. Καὶ ποῦ τὸ, _Τὰ πάντα ἐπ᾽
αὐτῷ συνέστηκεν_; Εἰ δὲ, ἅμα τῷ γενέσθαι τὴν κτίσιν,
παρεδόθη αὐτῷ πᾶσα [4]· χρεία οὐκ ἦν παραδόσεως· πάντα
γὰρ δι᾽ αὐτοῦ ἐγένετο, καὶ περιττὸν τὸ παραδίδοσθαι τῷ
Κυρίῳ ταῦτα, ὧν αὐτός ἐστι δημιουργός. Κύριος γὰρ ἦν
τῶν γινομένων ἐν τῷ ποιεῖν αὐτά. Ἀλλὰ καὶ εἰ [5] μετὰ
τὸ γενέσθαι παρεδόθη αὐτῷ, σκόπει τὸ ἄτοπον. Εἰ γὰρ
παρεδόθη, καὶ ἀνεχώρησεν ὁ Πατὴρ λαβόντος τούτου· καὶ
κινδυνεύομεν εἰς τάς τινων μυθολογίας ἐμπεσεῖν, ὅτι,
τούτῳ παραδοὺς, αὐτὸς ἀπέστη. Ἢ εἰ τοῦ Υἱοῦ ἔχοντος,
ἔχει καὶ ὁ Πατὴρ, ἔδει μὴ εἰπεῖν, _παρεδόθη_, ἀλλ᾽ ὅτι
προσελάβετο κοινωνὸν, ὡς Παῦλος τὸν Σιλουανόν. Ἀλλὰ καὶ
μᾶλλον ἄτοπον τοῦτο· οὐ γὰρ ἐνδεὴς ὁ Θεὸς, οὐδὲ διὰ
χρείαν προσελάβετο τὸν Υἱὸν εἰς βοήθειαν· ἀλλὰ, Πατὴρ
ὢν τοῦ Λόγου, πάντα δι᾽ αὐτοῦ ποιεῖ, καὶ οὐ παραδίδωσιν
αὐτῷ κτίσιν, ἀλλὰ δι᾽ αὐτοῦ καὶ ἐν αὐτῷ τῆς κτίσεως
προνοεῖ, ὥστε μηδὲ στρουθίον ἄνευ τοῦ Πατρὸς πεσεῖν εἰς
τὴν γῆν, μηδὲ τὸν χόρτον ἀμφιέννυσθαι ἄνευ τοῦ Θεοῦ,
ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐργαζομένου τοῦ Πατρὸς, ἐργάζεσθαι καὶ τὸν
Υἱὸν ἕως ἄρτι. Οὐκοῦν τῶν ἀσεβῶν τὸ φρόνημα μάταιον. Οὐ
γὰρ, ὡς νοοῦσιν, ἔστιν, ἀλλὰ τῆς κατὰ σάρκα οἰκονομίας
ἐστὶ δηλωτικὸν τὸ ῥητόν.

2. Ἐπειδὴ γὰρ ἥμαρτε καὶ πέπτωκεν ὁ ἄνθρωπος, καὶ
πεσόντος αὐτοῦ τὰ πάντα τετάρακται, ὁ θάνατος ἴσχυεν
ἀπὸ Ἀδὰμ μέχρι Μωϋσέως [6], ἡ γῆ κεκατήραται, ὁ ᾅδης
ἠνοίγη, ὁ παράδεισος ἐκλείσθη, ὁ οὐρανὸς ἐθυμώθη, καὶ
τέλος ἐφθάρη ὁ ἄνθρωπος καὶ ἀπεκτηνώθη, ὁ δὲ [7]
διάβολος ἐνήλλετο καθ᾽ ἡμῶν. Τότε δὴ ὁ Θεὸς φιλάνθρωπος
ὢν καὶ μὴ θέλων ἀπολέσθαι τὸν κατ᾽ εἰκόνα ἄνθρωπον,
ἔλεγε· _Τίνα ἀποστελῶ, καὶ τίς πορεύσεται_; Πάντων τε
σιωπώντων, ὁ Υἱὸς ἔλεγεν·_ Ἰδοὺ ἐγὼ, ἀπόστειλόν με_·
καὶ δὴ τότε λέγων, _βάδιζε_, παρέδωκεν αὐτῷ τὸν
ἄνθρωπον, ἵνα γένηται αὐτὸς ὁ Λόγος σὰρξ, καὶ παραλαβὼν
τὴν σάρκα κατὰ πάντα διορθώσηται. Παρεδόθη γὰρ αὐτῷ, ὡς
ἰατρῷ, θεραπεῦσαι τὸ δῆγμα τοῦ ὄφεως· ὡς ζωῇ, ἀνεγεῖραι
τὸ νεκρόν [8]· ὡς φωτὶ, καταυγάσαι τὸ σκότος· καὶ λόγῳ
ὄντι, ἀνακαινίσαι τὸ λογικόν. Ὡς γοῦν παρεδόθη αὐτῷ τὰ
πάντα, καὶ γέγονεν ἄνθρωπος, εὐθὺς διορθώθη καὶ
ἐτελειώθη τὰ ὅλα· ἡ γῆ ἀντὶ κατάρας εὐλόγηται, ὁ
παράδεισος ἠνοίγη τῷ λῃστῇ [9], ὁ ᾅδης ἔπτηξε, καὶ τὰ
μνημεῖα ἠνοίγη, ἐγειρομένων τῶν νεκρῶν, αἱ πύλαι τοῦ
οὐρανοῦ ἐπήρθησαν, ἵν᾽ ὁ ἐξ Ἐδὼμ παραγένηται. Ἀμέλει τὸ
πῶς παρεδόθη αὐτῷ πάντα, σημᾶναι θέλων αὐτὸς ὁ Σωτὴρ,
ἐπήγαγεν εὐθὺς [10], ὡς ὁ Ματθαῖός φησιν· _Δεῦτε πρὸς
μὲ, πάντες οἱ κοπιῶντες καὶ πεφορτισμένοι, κἀγὼ
ἀναπαύσω ὑμᾶς_· παρεδόθητε γάρ μοι, ἵνα κοπιάσαντας
[11] ἀναπαύσω, καὶ νεκρωθέντας ζωοποιήσω. Συνᾴδει δὲ
τούτῳ καὶ τὸ παρὰ τῷ Ἰωάννῃ κείμενον· _Ὁ Πατὴρ ἀγαπᾷ
τὸν Υἱὸν, καὶ πάντα δέδωκεν ἐν τῇ χειρὶ αὐτοῦ_. Δέδωκε
γὰρ, ἵν᾽, ὥσπερ δι᾽ αὐτοῦ τὰ πάντα γέγονεν, οὕτως ἐν
αὐτῷ τὰ πάντα ἀνακαινισθῆναι δυνηθῇ. Οὐ γὰρ, ἵν᾽ ἐκ
πτωχοῦ πλούσιος γένηται, παρεδόθη αὐτῷ [12], οὐδ᾽ ἵνα,
ὡς μὴ ἔχων ἐξουσίαν, λάβῃ ἐξουσίαν, παρέλαβε τὰ πάντα,
μὴ γένοιτο! ἀλλ᾽ ἵνα μᾶλλον, ὡς Σωτὴρ, τὰ πάντα
διορθώσηται [13]. Ἔπρεπε μὲν γὰρ τὴν μὲν ἀρχὴν τῆς
δημιουργίας _δι᾽ αὐτοῦ_ γενέσθαι εἰς τὸ εἶναι αὐτὰ, τὴν
δὲ διόρθωσιν _ἐν αὐτῷ_, ἐχουσῶν διαφορὰν τῶν λέξεων. Ἐν
ἀρχῇ μὲν γὰρ δι᾽ αὐτοῦ γέγονεν εἰς τὸ εἶναι· ὕστερον
δὲ, πεσόντων πάντων, γέγονεν ὁ Λόγος σὰρξ, καὶ
ἐνεδύσατο αὐτὴν, ἵν᾽ ἐν αὐτῷ τὰ ὅλα κατορθωθῇ. Πάσχων
γὰρ αὐτὸς ἡμᾶς ἀνέπαυσε [14], καὶ πεινῶν αὐτὸς ἡμᾶς
ἔτρεφε, καὶ εἰς τὸν ᾅδην καταβαίνων ἡμᾶς ἀνέφερε. Τότε
γοῦν γινομένων πάντων πρόσταγμα ἦν τὸ γενέσθαι, οἶον
τὸ, _ἐξαγαγέτω_, καὶ, _γενέσθω_· ἐπὶ δὲ τῇ διορθώσει
παραδοθῆναι πάντα ἔπρεπεν, ἵν᾽ αὐτὸς γένηται ἄνθρωπος,
καὶ ἐν αὐτῷ τὰ πάντα ἀνακαινισθῇ. Ἐν αὐτῷ γὰρ ὢν ὁ
ἄνθρωπος, ἐζωοποιεῖτο· διὰ τοῦτο γὰρ συνεπλάκη ὁ Λόγος
τῷ ἀνθρώπῳ, ἵνα ἡ κατάρα μηκέτι ἰσχύσῃ κατὰ τοῦ
ἀνθρώπου. Διὰ τοῦτο γὰρ καὶ ἐν ἑβδομηκοστῷ πρώτῳ ψαλμῷ
τοὺς ἀξιοῦντάς φασι [15] τὸν Θεὸν περὶ τοῦ ἀνθρωπείου
γένους, Ὁ Θεὸς, _τὸ κρῖμά σου τῷ βασιλεῖ δὸς_, ἵνα καὶ
τὸ καθ᾽ ἡμῶν κρῖμα τοῦ θανάτου, ὅπερ ἦν καθ᾽ ἡμῶν,
παραδοθῇ τῷ Υἱῷ, καὶ λοιπὸν αὐτὸς ἐν αὐτῷ αὐτὸ
ἐξαφανίσῃ, ἀποθανὼν ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν. Τοῦτο γὰρ σημαίνων καὶ
αὐτὸς ἔλεγεν ἐν τῷ ὀγδοηκοστῷ ἑβδόμῳ ψαλμῷ· _Ἐπ᾽ ἐμὲ
ἐπεστηρίχθη ὁ θυμός σου_. Τὸν γὰρ καθ᾽ ἡμῶν θυμὸν αὐτὸς
ἐβάσταζεν, ὡς [16] καὶ ἐν τῷ ἑκατοστῷ τριακοστῷ ἑβδόμῳ
φησί· _Κύριος ἀνταποδώσει ὑπὲρ ἐμοῦ_.

3. Οὕτω μὲν οὖν πάντα παραδεδόσθαι τῷ Σωτῆρι νοεῖν
ἔξεστι, καὶ εἰ δεῖ νοήσαντα πάλιν εἰπεῖν [17],
παραδέδοται αὐτῷ ἅπερ οὐκ εἶχεν. Οὐ γὰρ ἦν ἄνθρωπος πρὸ
τούτου, ἀλλὰ γέγονε διὰ τὸ σῶσαι τοῦτον. Καὶ οὐκ ἦν ἐν
ἀρχῇ σὰρξ ὁ Λόγος, ἀλλ᾽ ὕστερον γέγονε σὰρξ, ἐν ᾗ καὶ
τὴν πρὸς ὑμᾶς ἔχθραν διήλλαξε κατὰ τὸν Ἀπόστολον, καὶ
τὸν νόμον τῶν ἐντολῶν ἐν δόγμασι κατήργησεν, ἵνα τοὺς
δύο κτίσῃ εἰς ἕνα καινὸν ἄνθρωπον, ποιῶν εἰρήνην, καὶ
ἀποκαταλλάξῃ τοὺς ἀμφοτέρους ἐν ἑνὶ σώματι πρὸς τὸν
Πατέρα. Ἃ μέντοι ἔχει ὁ Πατὴρ, ταῦτα [18] καὶ τοῦ Υἱοῦ
ἐστιν, ὡς ἐν τῷ Ἰωάννῃ φησί· _Πάντα, ὅσα ἔχει ὁ Πατὴρ,
ἐμά ἐστι_, πάνυ γε καλῶς ἐχόντων τῶν ῥημάτων. Ὅτε μὲν
γὰρ ὅπερ οὐκ ἦν ἐγίνετο, παραδίδοται αὐτῷ τὰ πάντα· ὅτε
δὲ τὴν πρὸς τὸν Πατέρα ἑνότητα σημᾶναι βούλεται, οὐ
κρύπτει, ἀλλὰ διδάσκει λέγων· _Πάντα, ὅσα ἔχει ὁ Πατὴρ,
ἐμά ἐστι_. Καὶ τὴν ἀκρίβειαν χρὴ θαυμάζειν τοῦ λόγου.
Οὐ γὰρ εἴρηκε, _Πάντα ὅσα ἔχει ὁ Πατὴρ_, δέδωκέ [19]
μοι, ἵνα μὴ, ὥς ποτε μὴ ἔχων, δειχθῇ· ἀλλ᾽ ὅτι ἐμά
ἐστιν. Ὄντων γὰρ ἐν τῇ τοῦ Πατρὸς ἐξουσίᾳ τούτων, ἔστιν
ὁμοίως ἐν τῇ τοῦ Υἱοῦ. Τί δὲ ἔχει ὁ Πατὴρ, ἐξεταστέον
πάλιν. Εἰ μὲν γὰρ τὴν κτίσιν σημαίνει, οὐδὲν ἄρα εἶχε
πρὸ τῆς κτίσεως, καὶ φαίνεται προσλαμβάνων ἀπὸ τῆς
κτίσεως. Ἀλλὰ μὴ γένοιτο τοῦτο νοεῖν! Ὡς γάρ ἐστιν
αὐτὸς πρὸ τῆς κτίσεως, οὕτω καὶ πρὸ τῆς κτίσεως ἔχει
ἅπερ ἔχει, ἅτινα καὶ τοῦ Υἱοῦ εἶναι πιστεύομεν. Εἰ γὰρ
ἐν τῷ Πατρὶ ὁ Υἱὸς, ἄρα ἂν τὰ πάντα, ὅσα ἔχει ὁ Πατὴρ,
τοῦ Υἱοῦ ἐστιν. Ἀνατρέπον δὲ τὸ ῥητόν ἐστι τοῦτο τὴν
τῶν κακοδόξων πονηρίαν λεγόντων· «Εἰ πάντα παραδέδοται
τῷ Υἱῷ, ἄρα πέπαυται ὁ Πατὴρ τῆς τῶν παραδοθέντων
ἐξουσίας, ἐπειδὴ κατέστησεν ἀνθ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ τὸν Υἱόν· _Καὶ
γὰρ ὁ Πατὴρ οὐδένα κρίνει, πᾶσαν δὲ τὴν κρίσιν δέδωκε
τῷ Υἱῷ_.» Ἀλλ᾽ ἐμφραττέσθω τὰ στόματα τῶν λαλούντων τὰ
ἄδικα· οὐ γὰρ, ἐπειδὴ πᾶσαν τὴν κρίσιν δέδωκε τῷ Υἱῷ,
αὐτὸς τῆς δεσποτείας ἐψίλωται· οὐδ᾽ ὅτι πάντα
παραδεδόσθαι τῷ Υἱῷ παρὰ τοῦ Πατρὸς εἴρηται, αὐτὸς οὐκ
ἔστιν ἐπὶ πάντων· χωριζόντων δὲ σαφῶς τὸν Μονογενῆ τοῦ
Θεοῦ τὸν ἀχώριστον [20] τῇ φύσει, εἰ καὶ τοῖς λόγοις
οὗτοι μεμηνότες χωρίζουσιν, οὐ νοοῦντες οἱ δυσσεβεῖς,
ὡς οὐκ ἂν χωρισθείη ποτὲ τὸ φῶς τοῦ ἡλίου, ἀλλ᾽ ἔστιν
ἐν αὐτῷ φυσικῶς. Ἀπὸ γὰρ τῶν ἐν χερσὶ καὶ [21] συνήθων
εἰκόνι πτωχῇ χρησαμένους, τὸ νοούμενον παραστῆσαι τῷ
λόγῳ δεῖ, ἐπειδὴ τολμηρὸν ἐμβατεύειν τὴν ἀπερινόητον
φύσιν.

4. Ὡς οὐκ ἂν τοίνυν ποτὲ τὸ ἐξ ἡλίου φῶς τὴν οἰκουμένην
καταλάμπον χωρὶς αὐτοῦ περιλάμπειν δυνατὸν νοηθῆναι
παρὰ τοῖς ἐῤῥωμένοις τὸν νοῦν, ἐπειδὴ ἥνωται τῇ φύσει
τοῦ ἡλίου τὸ ἐξ αὐτοῦ φῶς, καὶ ὡς εἰ λέγοι τὸ φῶς·
Πάντα καταλάμπειν παρείληφα παρὰ τοῦ ἡλίου, καὶ πάντα
αὔξειν καὶ ἐνισχύειν διὰ τῆς ἐν ἐμοὶ θερμότητος· οὐ
χωρίζειν τις μεμηνὼς νοήσει τὴν τοῦ ἡλίου ὀνομασίαν τῆς
ἐξ αὐτοῦ φύσεως, ἥ ἐστι τὸ φῶς· οὕτω νοεῖν εὐσεβὲς καὶ
τὴν θείαν οὐσίαν τοῦ Λόγου ἡνωμένην φύσει τῷ ἑαυτοῦ
Πατρί. Καὶ γὰρ τὸ ἐν χερσὶ ῥητὸν τὴν σαφήνειαν παρέξει
τοῦ ζητουμένου σαφεστάτην, εἰπόντος τοῦ Σωτῆρος·
_Πάντα, ὅσα ἔχει ὁ Πατὴρ, ἐμά ἐστιν_, ὃ δηλοῖ αὐτὸν ἀεὶ
εἶναι σὺν τῷ Πατρί· τὸ γὰρ, _ὅσα ἔχει_, τὴν δεσποτείαν
κρατεῖν δείκνυσι τὸν Πατέρα· τὸ δὲ, _ἐμά ἐστι_, τὴν
ἀχώριστον ἕνωσιν. Ἀνάγκη τοίνυν νοεῖν ἡμᾶς ὅτι ἔστιν ἐν
τῷ Πατρὶ τὸ ἀΐδιον, τὸ αἰώνιον, τὸ ἀθάνατον· ἔστι δὲ ἐν
αὐτῷ οὐχ ὡς ἀλλότρια αὐτοῦ, ἀλλ᾽ ὡς ἐν πηγῇ ἐστιν ἐν
αὐτῷ ἀναπαυόμενα καὶ ἐν τῷ Υἱῷ. Ὅταν τοίνυν περὶ Υἱοῦ
νοεῖν ἐθέλῃς [22] μαθὼν τίνα ἐστὶ τὰ ἐν τῷ Πατρὶ, ταῦτα
καὶ ἐν τῷ Υἱῷ εἶναι πίστευε. Εἰ μὲν οὖν κτίσμα ἐστὶν ὁ
Πατὴρ ἢ ποίημα, ἔστι ταῦτα καὶ ἐν τῷ Υἱῷ· καὶ εἰ
θεμιτὸν εἰπεῖν ἐπὶ τοῦ Πατρὸς, ἦν ποτε, ὅτε οὐκ ἦν, ἡ
ἐξ οὐκ ὄντων· λεγέσθω τοῦτο καὶ ἐπὶ τοῦ Υἱοῦ. Εἰ δὲ
ἀσεβές ἐστι ταῦτα λέγειν ἐν τῷ Πατρὶ εἶναι, ἀσεβὲς ἔστω
καὶ ἐν τῷ Υἱῷ ταῦτα νοεῖν. Τὰ γὰρ τοῦ Πατρὸς, ταῦτα τοῦ
Υἱοῦ ἐστιν. Ὁ γὰρ τιμῶν τὸν Υἱὸν τιμᾷ τὸν Πατέρα τὸν
πέμψαντα αὐτὸν, καὶ ὁ δεχόμενος τὸν Υἱὸν, δέχεται σὺν
αὐτῷ τὸν Πατέρα· ὁ γὰρ ἑωρακὼς τὸν Υἱὸν ἑώρακε τὸν
Πατέρα. Ὡς οὖν οὐκ ἔστι κτίσμα ὁ Πατὴρ, οὕτως οὐδὲ ὁ
Υἱός [23]· καὶ ὡς οὐκ ἔστιν εἰπεῖν ἐπ᾽ αὐτοῦ, ἦν ποτε,
ὅτε οὐκ ἦν, ἢ ἐξ οὐκ ὄντων· οὕτως οὐχ ἁρμόζει, οὐδ᾽ ἐπὶ
τοῦ Υἱοῦ λέγειν τὸ αὐτό. Ἀλλὰ μᾶλλον ὡς ἐν τῷ Πατρὶ τὸ
ἀΐδιον, τὸ ἀθάνατον, τὸ ἀεὶ, τὸ μὴ κτίσμα· οὕτω καὶ
περὶ Υἱοῦ φρονεῖν ἀκόλουθον. Κατὰ γὰρ τὸ γεγραμμένον,
_Καθὼς ὁ Πατὴρ ζωὴν ἔχει ἐν ἑαυτῷ, οὕτως ἔδωκε καὶ τῷ
Υἱῷ ζωὴν ἔχειν ἐν ἑαυτῷ_. _Δέδωκε_ δὲ εἴρηκεν, ἵνα τὸν
διδόντα Πατέρα δείξῃ. Ὡς δὲ ἐν τῷ Πατρὶ, οὕτω καὶ ἐν τῷ
Υἱῷ ἐστιν ἡ ζωὴ, ἵνα τὸ ἀδιαίρετον καὶ ἀΐδιον διδάξῃ.
Διὰ τοῦτο γὰρ καὶ ἀκριβῶς εἴρηκεν, Ὅσα ἔχει ὁ Πατὴρ,
ἵνα, καὶ ὧδε λέγων τὸν Πατέρα, μὴ καὶ αὐτὸς Πατὴρ
νομισθῇ. Οὐ γὰρ εἴρηκεν, Ἐγώ εἰμι ὁ Πατὴρ, ἀλλ᾽, _Ὅσα
ἔχει ὁ Πατήρ_.

5. Πατὴρ μὲν γὰρ, ὦ Ἀρειανοὶ, παρὰ τοῦ Πατρὸς
χρηματίζοι ὁ μονογενὴς Υἱὸς αὐτοῦ, οὐ μὴν ὡς ὑμεῖς
πλανώμενοι ἴσως ἂν ὑπολάβοιτε, ἀλλ᾽ Υἱὸς μὲν τοῦ
γεννήσαντος Πατρὸς, πατὴρ δὲ τοῦ μέλλοντος αἰῶνος. Δεῖ
γὰρ ὑμῶν πάσας τὰς ὑπονοίας περιελεῖν. Φησὶ γοῦν διὰ
τοῦ προφήτου· _Ἐγεννήθη ἡμῖν Υἱὸς, καὶ ἐδόθη ἡμῖν, οὗ ἡ
ἀρχὴ ἐπὶ τοῦ ὤμου αὐτοῦ, καὶ καλεῖται τὸ ὄνομα αὐτοῦ
Μεγάλης βουλῆς ἄγγελος, Θεὸς ἰσχυρὸς, ἐξουσιαστὴς,
πατὴρ τοῦ μέλλοντος αἰῶνος_. Οὐκοῦν καὶ πατὴρ τοῦ
μέλλοντος αἰῶνος ὁ Μονογενὴς, καὶ Θεὸς ἰσχυρὸς, καὶ
ἐξουσιαστὴς ὁ Υἱὸς ὑπάρχει τοῦ Θεοῦ· καὶ σαφῶς
δέδεικται, ὅτι πάντα, ὅσα ἔχει ὁ Πατὴρ, αὐτοῦ ἐστι, καὶ
καθὼς ζωὴν δίδωσιν ὁ Πατὴρ, καὶ τῷ Υἱῷ ὁμοίως πάρεστιν
οὓς θέλει ζωοποιεῖν [24]. _Ἀκούσονται γὰρ_, φησὶ, _τῆς
φωνῆς τοῦ Υἱοῦ οἱ νεκροὶ, καὶ ζήσονται_. Καὶ ἓν θέλημα
Πατρὸς καὶ Υἱοῦ καὶ βούλημα, ἐπεὶ καὶ ἡ φύσις μία καὶ
ἀδιαίρετος. Καὶ περισσῶς οἱ Ἀρειανοὶ κόπτουσιν ἑαυτοὺς,
μὴ νοοῦντες τὸ εἰρημένον πρὸς [25] τοῦ Σωτῆρος ἡμῶν,
τὸ, _Πάντα, ὅσα ἔχει ὁ Πατὴρ, ἐμά ἐστιν_. Ἐκ γὰρ
τούτου, καὶ ἡ Σαβελλίου ἀνατρέπεται παραφροσύνη, καὶ
τῶν νῦν Ἰουδαίων ἐλέγξει τὴν ἄνοιαν. Διὰ γὰρ τοῦτο ζωὴν
ἔχων ἐν ἑαυτῷ ὁ Μονογενὴς, ὡς ὁ Πατὴρ ἔχει, καὶ μόνος
οἶδε τίς ἐστιν ὁ Πατὴρ, ἐν τῷ Πατρὶ ὢν, καὶ ἔχων ἐν
ἑαυτῷ τὸν Πατέρα. Εἰκὼν γάρ ἐστι, καὶ ἀκολούθως, ὡς ἐν
εἰκόνι, πάντα τὰ τοῦ Πατρὸς ἐν αὐτῷ [26] ἐστι. Σφραγὶς
γάρ ἐστιν ἰσότυπος ἐν αὐτῷ δεικνὺς τὸν Πατέρα, Λόγος
ζῶν, ἀληθινὸς, δύναμις, σοφία, ἁγιασμὸς, καὶ
ἀπολύτρωσις ἡμῶν. _Ἐν αὐτῷ γὰρ καὶ ζῶμεν, καὶ
κινούμεθα, καί ἐσμεν_· καὶ, _Οὐδεὶς γινώσκει τίς ἐστιν
ὁ Πατὴρ εἰ μὴ ὁ Υἱὸς, καὶ τίς ἐστιν ὁ Υἱὸς εἰ μὴ ὁ
Πατήρ_.

6. Καὶ πῶς τολμῶσιν οἱ δυσσεβεῖς φλυαρεῖν, ἃ μὴ θέμις,
ἄνθρωποι ὄντες, καὶ τὰ ἐπὶ γῆς οὐχ εὑρίσκοντες
διηγήσασθαι; Τί δὲ λέγω τὰ ἐπὶ γῆς; τὰ ἑαυτῶν ἡμῖν
εἰπάτωσαν, εἰ ἄρα εὑρεῖν δυνήσονται τὴν ἑαυτῶν
ἐξιχνιάσαι φύσιν. Τολμηροὶ ὄντως καὶ αὐθάδεις, δόξας οὐ
τρέμοντες, ἔνθα ἐπιθυμοῦσιν ἄγγελοι παρακῦψαι, καὶ
τοσούτῳ καὶ τὴν φύσιν καὶ τὴν τάξιν ἀνώτεροι. Τί γὰρ
ἐγγύτερον τῶν χερουβὶμ ἢ τῶν σεραφίμ; καὶ ὅμως οὐδὲ
ὁρῶντα, ἢ ποσὶν ἑστῶτα, ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ γυμνοῖς,
κεκαλυμμένοις δὲ ὥσπερ καὶ τοῖς προσώποις τὴν
δοξολογίαν προσφέρουσιν, ἀπαύστοις τοῖς χείλεσιν οὐδὲν
ἕτερον ἢ τὴν θείαν καὶ ἄφραστον φύσιν τῇ τρισαγιότητι
δοξάζοντα. Καὶ οὐδαμοῦ τις τῶν θεσπεσίων προφητῶν, τῶν
μάλιστα καταξιωθέντων τῆς τοιαύτης θέας, ἀπήγγειλεν
ἡμῖν, ὅτι ἐν μὲν τῷ ἅπαξ εἰπεῖν τὸ, _ἅγιος_, μεγάλῃ τῇ
φωνῇ, ἐν δὲ τῷ δευτερῶσαι, ἧσσον, ἐν δὲ τῷ τρισσεῦσαι,
ὑποβεβηκότως· καὶ μετὰ τοῦτο τὸν πρῶτον ἁγιασμὸν
κυριολογοῦντα, τὸν δὲ δεύτερον ὑποτάσσοντα, καὶ τὸν
τρίτον κατώτερον τιθέντα. Ἀλλ᾽ ἄπαγε τῆς ἀνοίας τῶν
θεοστυγῶν καὶ ἀφρόνων [27]! Ἡ γὰρ πανύμνητος καὶ
σεβάσμιος καὶ προσκυνητὴ Τριὰς μία καὶ ἀδιαίρετος καὶ
ἀσχημάτιστος. Συνάπτεται δὲ ἀσυγχύτως, ὥσπερ καὶ
ἀτμήτως ἡ μονὰς χωρίζεται. Τὸ γὰρ τρίτον τὰ τίμια ζῶα
ταῦτα προσφέρειν τὴν δοξολογίαν _Ἅγιος, ἅγιος, ἅγιος_
λέγοντα, τὰς τρεῖς [28] ὑποστάσεις τελείας δεικνύντα
ἐστὶν, ὡς καὶ ἐν τῷ λέγειν τὸ [29], _Κύριος_, τὴν μίαν
οὐσίαν δηλοῦσιν. Οἱ τοίνυν ἐλασσοῦντες τὸν μονογενῆ τοῦ
Θεοῦ Υἱὸν εἰς Θεὸν βλασφημοῦσι, τὴν τελειότητα
κακοδοξοῦντες, καὶ ἀτελῆ διαβάλλοντες· καὶ κολάσεως
μεγίστης ἑαυτοὺς ὑπευθύνους καθιστῶσιν. Ὁ γὰρ εἰς
ὁποτέραν τῶν ὑποστάσεων βλασφημιῶν οὐχ ἕξει ἄφεσιν οὔτε
ἐν τῷ αἰῶνι τούτῳ, οὔτε ἐν τῷ μέλλοντι. Δυνατὸς δέ
ἐστιν ὁ Θεὸς ἀνοῖξαι τοὺς ὀφθαλμοὺς τῆς καρδίας αὐτῶν
πρὸς κατανόησιν τοῦ ἡλίου τῆς δικαιοσύνης· ἵν᾽,
ἐπιγνόντες ὃν πάλαι ἠθέτουν, συντόνῳ τῷ τῆς εὐσεβείας
λογισμῷ σὺν ἡμῖν αὐτὸν δοξάσωσιν, ὅτι αὐτοῦ ἐστιν ἡ
βασιλεία, τοῦ [30] Πατρὸς, καὶ Υἱοῦ, καὶ τοῦ ἁγίου
Πνεύματος νῦν καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας. Ἀμήν.



IN ILLUD:

_Omnia mihi tradita sunt a Patre, et nemo novit quis
sit Filius, nisi Pater, et quis sit Pater, nisi Filius,
et cui voluerit Filius revelare (1)_

1. Id quoque non intelligentes Arii hæresis secatores
Eusebius ejusque gregales, impie in Dominum agunt. Si
quidem illi hac voce _omnia_ rerum creatarum dominatum
comprehendentes, ad hunc modum argumentantur: Si omnia
ei tradita sunt, fuit ergo aliquando tempus, cum illa
non habuerit. Quod si aliquando non habuit, non est ex
Patre. Nam si ex Patre esset, illa profecto semper
habuisset, quippe qui esset ex Patre, nec proinde ea
accipere illi fuisset necesse. Verum inde etiam
facilius eorum insipientiam convincere licebit. Nec
enim rerum creatarum sive factarum dominatum et
principatum denotat vox illa, sed quemdam
dispensationis sensum includit. Si enim cum verba illa
protulit, omnia tunc ei sunt tradita, manifestum est
Verbi inutilem fuisse creationem, antequam ea
acciperet. Quod si ita est, qui verum potest esse, quod
de illo dicitur: _Omnia in ipso constant_ (2)? si vero
tunc cum fiebant res creatæ, omnes illi traditas fuisse
dicatur, id sane non necesse fuit, siquidem omnia per
ipsum facta sunt; ac proinde supervacaneum fuit illa
Domino tradi, quorum ipse erat opifex. Nam vere rerum,
quæ fiebant, Dominus erat cum eas ipse faceret. Quod si
illas postquam factæ sunt traditas ei esse contendant,
vide quam id sit absurdum. Si enim illi traditæ sunt,
eoque accipiente recessit Pater, periculum sane est ne
in quorumdam fabulas incidamus, ut scilicet putemus
Patrem, postquam omnia Verbo tradidit, ab iisdem ipsum
discessisse. Vel si habente Filio, habet quoque Pater,
non dicendum erat, _Tradita sunt_: sed quod Filium
socium assumpsit, uti Paulus Silvanum. Verum hoc etiam
magis absurdum est, nec enim ulla re indiget Deus, nec
inopiæ causa Filium socium sibi et adjutorem adjunxit:
sed quia Pater Verbi est, omnia per ipsum facit; neque
illi res creatas tradit, sed per ipsum et in ipso rebus
creatis providet, ita ut nec passerculus sine Patre
cadat super terram (3), nec fenum sine Deo vestiatur
(4), et Patre operante Filius quoque usque modo
operetur (5). Vana itaque et futilis est impiorum
interpretatio. Nec enim verba de quibus agitur, perinde
ut ipsi explicant, debent intelligi, sed humanam Verbi
dispensationem significant.

2. Postea enim quam peccavit et cecidit homo, eoque
cadente omnia sunt perturbata, mors ab Adam usque ad
Moysem invaluit (6), maledicta est terra, inferi aperti
sunt, clausus est paradisus, cœli infensi nobis sunt
facti, ac denique corruptus est homo et jumentis
similis effectus est (7), quæ quidem diabolo causa
fuit, cur nobis deinceps insultaret. Tunc ergo benignus
Deus hominem ad sui imaginem creatum perire nolens
dixit: _Quem mittam, et quis ibit?_ Cunctis autem
tacentibus dixit Filius: _Ecce ego, mitte me_ (8). Tum
Pater, _vade_ dicens, hominem Filio tradidit, ut
scilicet ipse caro fieret, et assumptam carnem totam
penitus renovaret. Illi, inquam, homo traditus est
tanquam medico, ut morsum quem ipsi serpens inflixerat,
curaret: tanquam vitæ, ut mortuum excitaret: tanquam
luci, ut ejus tenebras illuminaret: tanquam rationi, ut
ejusdem rationem restitueret. Ut igitur cuncta ei sunt
tradita et factus est homo, omnia statim emendata et
perfecta sunt. Terra pro maledictione benedictionem
accepit, latroni reseratus est paradisus, inferi
tremuerunt, et his qui mortui erant excitatis, aperta
sunt monumenta; denique portæ cœli elevatæ sunt (9), ut
ille qui est ex Edom adveniret (10). Certe ipse
Salvator explicans quonam modo omnia sibi tradita
fuerint, mox, ut apud Matthæum legitur, subjecit:
_Venite ad me omnes qui laboratis et onerati estis, et
ego reficiam vos_ (11): mihi enim traditi estis, ut
labore defessos reficiam et mortuos revocem ad vitam.
Cui et illud concinit quod habet Joannes: _Pater
diligit Filium, et omnia dedit in manu ejus_ (12).
Dedit enim ut quemadmodum omnia per ipsum facta sunt,
sic in ipso omnia possent instaurari. Siquidem non
idcirco omnia ei tradita sunt, ut ex paupere dives
fieret, neque omnia accepit, ut potestam quam non
habebat acciperet, absit! sed potius ut omnia, tanquam
Salvator, instauraret. Nempe decebat creationis quidem
exordium _per ipsum_ fieri (13), ut res exsisterent:
earum autem instaurationem, _in ipso_ (14); quæ sane
verba inter se differunt. Nam initio quidem omnia per
ipsum facta sunt ut essent: postea vero, ubi omnia
defecerunt, Verbum caro factum est, quam scilicet
induit, ut in ipso omnia reficerentur. Siquidem ipse
patiendo nos recreavit, esuriendo nutrivit, et ad
inferos descendendo sursum extulit. Tunc ergo cum omnia
fieret, jubentis fiebant imperio, ut hæc verba
indicant, _producant, fiat_ (15). At in rerum
instauratione omnia ei tradi decuit, ut ipse homo
fieret, et omnia in eo renovarentur; homo enim quatenus
in illo erat, vivificabatur. Nam Verbum ideo se homini
conjunxit, ut nihil amplius contra hominem valeret
maledictio. Hinc qui psalmo septuagesimo primo, Deo pro
humano genere supplicant, hæc aiunt: _Deus, judicium
tuum regi da_ (16), ut et judicium mortis contra nos
prolatum Filio detur et ipse pro nobis moriens, illud
in seipso deleat. Hoc enim ipse significans, in
octogesimo septimo psalmo ait: _Super me confirmatus
est furor tuus_ (17). Siquidem ipse furorem portavit,
quo Deus in nos inflammatus erat, ut et in psalmo
centesimo tricesimo septimo dicit: _Dominus retribuet
pro me_ (18).

3. Itaque eo sensu omnia Salvatori tradita esse licet
intelligere, quæ si rursus explicare opus sit, vere ea
quæ non habebat, ipsi sunt tradita. Nec enim antea homo
erat, sed homo ipse factus est, ut hominem salvum
faceret. Nec in principio Verbum in carne erat, sed
postea caro factum est, in qua Dei in nos inimicitias,
juxta Apostolum, reconciliavit, et legem mandatorum
decretis evacuavit, ut duos conderet in unum novum
hominem, faciens pacem, et ambos Patri in uno corpore
reconciliaret (19). Quæ igitur Pater habet, hæc quoque
ad Filium pertinent, ut ipse apud Joannem testatur:
_Omnia quæcunque habet Pater, mea sunt_ (20): quæ
quidem apposite admodum sunt dicta. Namque cum factus
est quod antea non erat, tunc illi quidem omnia sunt
tradita: cum autem suam cum Patre unitatem indicat, non
obscure sed aperte ait: _Omnia quæcunque habet Pater,
mea sunt_. Quæ quam accurate sint dicta paulum
perpendere nec non admirari operæ pretium fuerit. Non
enim dixit: _Omnia quæcunque habet Pater_, mihi dedit,
ne videretur ea aliquando non habuisse: sed _mea sunt_.
Nam ut illa sunt in potestate Patris, ita et in Filii.
Quid autem habeat Pater, necesse est rursus perquirere.
Nam si his verbis rerum creationem significat: nihil
ergo habuit ante creationem, et quidquid habet, accepit
a creatione. Verum absit ut ita intelligamus. Siquidem
ut ante creationem ipse exsistit, ita et quæcunque
habet, ante creationem habet, quæ eadem Filii quoque
esse credimus. Si enim in Patre est Filius: omnia
igitur quæcunque habet Pater, Filii quoque sunt. Certe
hoc dictum pervicaciam et improbitatem evertit
hæreticorum, quorum nempe hæc sunt verba: «Si omnia
Filio tradita sunt: igitur Pater, eorum, quæ Filio
tradidit, potestate cessit, quippe qui Filium in sui
locum constituerit. _Etenim neminem Pater judicat, sed
omne judicium dedit Filio_ (21).» Verum obstruantur ora
loquentium iniqua (22). Nec enim omnium dominatu
spoliatus est Pater, quia omne judicium dedit Filio:
neque quod dictum est omnia Filio tradita esse a Patre,
ipsum idcirco non omnibus præsidere putandum est.
Obstruantur, inquam, illorum ora, qui unigenitum Dei
Filium, qui quidem ex natura individuus est, audent
dividere: quanquam insani verbis tantum dividant.
Nimirum impii non intelligunt lucem solis a sole
nunquam posse separari, sed semper naturaliter in sole
esse. Liceat enim tenui vulgarium rerum imagine id quod
intelligimus exprimere, quandoquidem nimiæ temeritatis
esset naturam, quam nemo cogitatione potest
comprehendere, curiosius perscrutari.

4. Quemadmodum ergo lux solis, quæ universum orbem
illuminat, sine sole lucere intelligi non potest ab his
nempe qui sana sunt mente, quia lux solis, ejusdem
naturæ unita est: ac proinde si lux ipsa diceret:
Accepi a sole ut omnia illuminarem, meoque calore
augerem et roborarem: nemo adeo stultus esset ut solem
a natura quæ ex ipso exoritur, quæ nimirum lux ipsa
est, his verbis separari arbitraretur: ita similiter
divinam Verbi substantiam suo Patri ex natura unitam
esse vera pietas jubet intelligere, uti ex hoc ipso
loco quem modo tractamus clarissimum est. Siquidem hæc
Salvatoris verba, _Omnia quæcunque habet Pater, mea
sunt_, eum cum Patre semper esse significant. Nam hæ
quidem voces, _quæcunque habet_, Patris dominatum
ostendunt: istæ vero, _mea sunt_, individuam utriusque
unionem indicant. Necesse est igitur nos intelligere
æternitatem et immortalitatem in Patre esse: esse,
inquam, non tanquam aliena, sed in ipso et in Filio
velut in fonte residere. Cum ergo de Filio cogitare
volueris, disce prius quænam sint in Patre, eaque in
Filio etiam esse credere ne dubites. Itaque si Pater
res est creata vel facta, hæc quoque Filio ascribe. Si
item de Patre licet dicere, fuit aliquando tempus cum
non esset, vel est ex nihilo: id etiam de Filio
dicatur. Sin autem hæc in Patre esse absque impietate
dici non potest, ea quoque Filio affingere impium sane
fuerit. Quæ enim Patris sunt, hæc et ad Filium
pertinent. Nam qui Filium honorat, Patrem qui eum misit
honorat: et qui Filium recipit, Patrem cum eodem
recipit (23). Siquidem qui videt Filium, videt et
Patrem (24). Quocirca ut Pater non est res creata, ita
nec Filius; atque ut de illo dici nequit, fuit
aliquando, cum non esset, vel est ex nihilo; sic nec ea
de Filio dicere convenit. Sed potius ut in Patre est
æternitas et immortalitas, ut idem semper est, nec res
est creata; sic eadem de Filio sentire necesse est.
Nam, uti scriptum est: _Sicut Pater habet vitam in
semetipso, sic dedit et Filio habere vitam in
semetipso_ (25). Porro verbo, _dedit_, usus est
Christus, ut dantem Patrem ostenderet. Ut autem in
Patre est vita, ita et in Filio vitam esse dixit, quo
individuam utriusque naturam et æternitatem indicaret.
Hinc enim caute dixit, _Omnia quæcunque habet Pater_,
ut hic Patrem nominans, idem ipse non esse Pater
crederetur. Namque non dixit, Ego sum Pater, sed,
_Quæcunque habet Pater_.

5. Equidem ipse unigenitus Dei Filius, o Ariani, pater
quoque a Patre appelletur, sed non eo sensu quem vos
errantes forte suspicamini: at pater futuri sæculi
dicitur. Necesse est enim vestras omnes falsas
suspiciones præcidere. En igitur prophetæ verba:
_Genitus est nobis Filius et datus est nobis, cujus
imperium super humerum ejus, et vocatur nomen ejus,
magni consilii Angelus, Deus fortis, potestatem habens,
Pater futuri sæculi_ (26). Pater ergo futuri sæculi est
unigenitus Dei Filius ut et Deus fortis et summa
potestate præditus: atque dilucide ostensum est omnia
quæcunque Pater habet Filii quoque esse; quemadmodum
Pater vitam impertit, ita et Filium quibus voluerit
vitam tribuere. Nam, ut Scriptura præmonet, _Mortui
audient vocem Filii et vivent_ (27). Una quoque Patris
et Filii est voluntas ac sententia, quia unam et
individuam habent naturam. Frustra igitur seipsos
excruciant Ariani, dum hæc nostri Servatoris verba
minime intelligunt, _Omnia quæcunque habet Pater, mea
sunt_. Siquidem ex his quoque penitus evertitur insanus
Sabellii error, et invicte coarguitur hodiernorum
Judæorum insipientia. Hinc enim vitam in semetipso
habens Unigenitus, quemadmodum Pater habet, solus novit
quis sit Pater, utpote cum ipse sit in Patre, et Patrem
habeat in seipso. Namque imago est, atque adeo omnia
quæ Patris sunt, in ipso quoque sunt sicut in imagine.
Etenim sigillum est eamdem formam referens, et Patrem
in seipso repræsentans, Verbum vivens et verum, virtus,
sapientia, sanctificatio et redemptio nostra. _In ipso
enim vivimus, et movemur, et sumus_ (28). Et: _Nemo
cognoscit quis sit Pater, nisi Filius; et quis sit
Filius, nisi Pater_ (29).

6. Quid igitur impii his de rebus, quas scrutari nefas
est, effutire non verentur; illi, inquam, qui et
homines sunt, nec vel ipsam rerum terrestrium naturam
possunt evolvere? Imo, quæ vel ipsos spectant, ipsi
explicent nobis, num videlicet suam ipsorum naturam
percipere queant? Temerarii certe illi nimiumque
confidentes, qui divinæ majestatis gloriam absque ullo
tremore scrutantur, in quam angeli cum natura tum
ordine ipsis adeo superiores desiderant prospicere
(30). Quid enim Deo propinquius quam cherubim et
seraphim? et tamen non audent aspicere vel pedibus
stare, imo non nuda sed obtecta veluti facie divinas
laudes labiis nunquam deficientibus celebrant, nihil
aliud quam divinæ et inexplicabilis naturæ gloriam
triplici sanctitatis titulo prædicantes. Nec vero ullus
e sanctis prophetis, qui hujusmodi visione maxime sunt
digni habiti, nobis renuntiavit illos magna voce usos
esse cum _sanctus_ prima vice proferrent; minus clara,
secunda vice; submissa denique, tertia vice: deindeque
prima sanctitate Dominum significari, secunda
subjectionem indicari, tertia demum inferiorem
designari ordinem. Verum apage hominum Deo invisorum
insaniam. Nam laudanda colendaque et adoranda Trinitas,
una et individua est, nec ullam figurant habet, sed
absque confusione conjungitur, quemadmodum ejusdem
unitas distinguitur absque divisione. Nimirum veneranda
illa animalia, trina ista _Sanctus, sanctus, sanctus_
iteratione tres perfectas denotant hypostases;
quemadmodum cum semel vocem _Dominus_ proferunt, unam
indicant substantiam. Qui ergo unigenitum Dei Filium
minorem faciunt, hi ipsum Deum suis blasphemiis
lacessunt, quippe qui prave de ejus perfectione
sentiant, eumque imperfectum arguant: seipsos autem
gravissimi profecto supplicii reos constituunt.
Quisquis enim blasphemiam in quamlibet hypostasim
audebit proferre, is veniam neque in hoc sæculo neque
in futuro poterit obtinere. Verum potest Deus oculos
cordis ipsorum aperire ad solem justitiæ perspiciendum,
ut illo cognito, eumdem, quem olim repudiabant,
constanti animi pietate nobiscum laudent, quoniam
ipsius est imperium, Patris videlicet et Filii et
Spiritus sancti, nunc et in sæcula. Amen.



Apparatus Criticus:

[1] Sic Reg. Segeur. et Basil. Alii et editi
ἐπιγινώσκει. Iid mox καί habent; alii vero et editi ἤ.
Præterea in editis consuetus præfigitur titulus, τοῦ ἐν
ἁγίοις, etc., quæ absunt a Reg. et Seguer.

[2] Sic Reg. et Segeuer. In aliis et editis καί deest.

[3] Sic Seguer. Alii autem et editi, δηλονότι. Paulo
post ἐπ᾽ αὐτῷ, Basil. habet ἐν αὐτῳ.

[4] Sic Reg. Seguer. et Basil. Alii vero et editi,
πάντα.

[5] Basil. καί post εἰ addit: Reg. et Seguer. ante εἰ.

[6] Sic. Reg. Seguer. et Basil., ut et habetur Rom. V,
14. Alii et editi habent Χριστοῦ. Iidem mss. ἴσχυσεν
ibidem habent; alii et editi ἴσχυεν.

[7] Reg. Seguer. et Basil., ὅτε. Alii et editi, ὁ δέ.

[8] Goblerianus, τὸν νεκρόν.

[9] Τῷ λῃστῇ habent Reg. Seguer. et Basil. editi vero
et alii ommittunt.

[10] Εὐθύς addunt Reg. et Seguer., sed alii et editi
ommittunt. Mox iidem et Basil. habent φησί. Editi, ἔφη.

[11] Sic Reg. et Seguer. Alii et editi, κοπιώσαντας.
Paulo post pro τούτῳ, Gobler. et Felckm. 1 anon. habent
τοῦτω. Ibidem hæc verba, παρὰ τῷἸωάννη κείμενον habent
Reg. Seguer. et Basil., quæ alii et editi omitunt.

[12] Reg. Seguer. et Basil. post γένηται, addunt
παρεδόθη αὐτῷ, quæ alii et editi omittunt. Ibid. Reg.
et Seguer., ὡς μὴ ἔχων ἐξουσίαν, λάβῃ ἐξουσίαν. Alii et
editi, ὡς μὴ ἔχων, ἐξουσίαν, λάβῃ.

[13] Sic Reg. Seguer. Basil. et Gobler. Alii vero et
editi, διορθώσῃ.

[14] Sic Seguer. et Gobler. At Reg., ἀνέπαυε. Editi et
alii, ἀνέλαβε.

[15] Reg. et Seguer., φασί. Editi, ἔφη.

[16] Reg. et Seg. post ὡς, addunt καί, quod alii
omittunt. Ibid. iidem et Gobler., φησί, editi ἔφη.

[17] Εἰπεῖν deest in Reg. et Seguer. Iidem et Basil. ac
Gobler., παραδίδοται.

[18] Hæc verba, ταῦτα usque ad ἐμά ἐστι, leguntur in
Regio., Segueriano et Basiliensi, sed desunt in aliis
et editis. Mox Regius et Seguerianus, ἐγίνετο. Alii et
editi, ἐγένετο.

[19] Regius et Seguerianus, παραδέδωκε.

[20] Basil., τοῦ Πατρὸς τὸ ἀχώριστον.

[21] Καί deest in Segueriano.

[22] Gobler. et Felckm. 1 anonym., ἐθέλεις.

[23] Regius, Seguerianus et Basiliensis, οὕτως ἔστι
κτίσμα ὁ Υἱός. Et paulo post iidem pro τὸ αὐτό; habent
ἦν ποτε ὅτε οὐκ ἦν. Et præteria Reg. et Seg. addunt ἢ
ἐξ οὐκ ὄντων.

[24] Sic Reg. Seg. et Basil. Alii vero et editi,
ζωοποιοῖ.

[25] Sic Regius et Seguer. Alii vero, περί.

[26] Regius, Seguerianus, Goblerianus et Basiliensis,
ἐν ἑαυτῷ, ut et paulo post, Basil. excepto.

[27] Regius et Seguerianus post θεοστυγῶν, addunt καὶ
ἀφρόνων quæ alii et editi omittunt.

[28] Τρεῖς deest in Regio et Seguer.

[29] Reg. Seg. et Basil. art. τό addunt, quem alii et
editi omittunt. Mox iidem vocem μίαν omittunt, quam
alii et editi habent.

[30] Regius, Seguerianus et Basil. art. τοῦ hic et in
sequentibus omittunt. Ibid. Seguerianus νῦν καὶ ἀεὶ,
καὶ εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. Ἀμήν. Regius et
Basiliensis νῦν καί omittunt. Regius addit quoque in
fine, ἁμήν.



Citati de Sacra Biblia:

(1) Matth. XI, 27.
(2) Coloss. I, 17.
(3) Matth. X, 29.
(4) Matth. VI, 30.
(5) Joan. V, 17.
(6) Rom. V, 14.
(7) Psal. XLVIII, 13.
(8) Isa. VI, 8.
(9) Psal. XXIII, 7.
(10) Isa. LXIII, 1.
(11) Matth. XI, 28.
(12) Joan. III, 35.
(13) Joan. I, 3.
(14) Ephes. I, 10.
(15) Genes. I, 3 seqq.
(16) Psal. LXXI, 2.
(17) Psal. LXXXVII, 8.
(18) Psal. CXXXVI, 8.
(19) Ephes. II, 15.
(20) Joan. XVI, 15.
(21) Joan. V, 22.
(22) Psal. LXII, 12.
(23) Matth. X, 40.
(24) Joan. XIV, 9.
(25) Joan. V, 26.
(26) Isa. IX, 6.
(27) Joan. V, 25.
(28) Act. XVII, 28.
(29) Matth. XI, 27.
(30) I Petr. I, 12.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of In Illud: Omnia mihi tradita sunt a
Patre, by Saint Athanasius Archbishop of Alexandria

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IN ILLUD: OMNIA MIHI TRADITA ***

***** This file should be named 37641-0.txt or 37641-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/7/6/4/37641/

Produced by Michael Gray, Diocese of San Jose

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
