The Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes and Queries, Vol. IV, Number 109,
November 29, 1851, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Notes and Queries, Vol. IV, Number 109, November 29, 1851
       A Medium of Inter-communication for Literary Men, Artists,
       Antiquaries, Genealogists, etc.

Author: Various

Editor: George Bell

Release Date: March 23, 2012 [EBook #39233]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES AND QUERIES, NOV 29, 1851 ***




Produced by Charlene Taylor, Jonathan Ingram and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Library of Early Journals.)





[Transcriber's note: Characters with macrons have been marked in
brackets with an equal sign, as [=e] for a letter e with a macron on
top. Underscores have been used to indicate _italic_ fonts; equal signs
indicate =bold= fonts. Original spelling variations have not been
standardized. A list of volumes and pages in "Notes and Queries" has
been added at the end.]




NOTES and QUERIES:

A MEDIUM OF INTER-COMMUNICATION

FOR

LITERARY MEN, ARTISTS, ANTIQUARIES, GENEALOGISTS, ETC.

"When found, make a note of."--CAPTAIN CUTTLE.

VOL. IV.--No. 109. SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 29. 1851.

Price Threepence. Stamped Edition 4_d._




CONTENTS.

                                                                Page


      NOTES:--

      Thomas More and John Fisher                                417

      Notes on Newspapers, by H. M. Bealby                       418

      Treatise of Equivocation                                   419

      Notes on Virgil, by Dr. Henry                              420

      Minor Notes:--Verses presented, to General
      Monck--Justice to Pope Pius V.                             421

      QUERIES:--

      Crosses and Crucifixes                                     422

      Master of the Buckhounds, by John Branfill Harrison        422

      Minor Queries:--"No Cross no Crown"--Dido and
      Æneas--Pegs and Thongs for Rowing: Torture among the
      Athenians--French Refugees--Isabel, Queen of the Isle
      of Man--Grand-daughter of John Hampden--Cicada or
      Tettigonia Septemdecim--The British Sidanen--Jenings or
      Jennings--Caleva Atrebatum, Site of--Abigail--Etymology
      of Durden--Connecticut Halfpenny                           423

      MINOR QUERIES ANSWERED:--Arms displayed on Spread
      Eagle--St. Beuno--Lists of Knights Bachelor--Walker--See
      of Durham                                                  424

      REPLIES:--

      Convocation of York                                        425

      The Old Countess of Desmond                                426

      Coins of Vabalathus                                        427

      Marriage of Ecclesiastics                                  427

      Replies to Minor Queries:--"Crowns have their
      Compass"--The Rev. Richard Farmer--Earwig                  428

      MISCELLANEOUS:--

      Notes on Books, Sales, Catalogues, &c.                     429

      Books and Odd Volumes wanted                               429

      Notices to Correspondents                                  430

      Advertisements                                             430




Notes.


THOMAS MORE AND JOHN FISHER.

Although I am afraid "NOTES AND QUERIES" may not be considered as open
to contributions purely bibliographical, and admitting I am uncertain
whether the following copy of the treatise of John Fisher, Bishop of
Rochester, has been before noted, I am induced to send this extract from
Techener's _Bulletin du Bibliophile_ for May 1851. The book is in the
library at Douai.

  "This Treatise concernynge the fruytful Saynges of David the King
  and prophete in the seven penytencyall psalmes, devyded in _ten_
  sermons, was made and compyled by the ryght reverente fader in god
  Johan Fyssher, doctour of dyvinyte and bysshop of Rochester, at
  the exortacion and sterynge of the most excellent pryncesse
  Margarete, Countesse of Richemount and Derby, and moder to out
  souverayne Lorde Kynge H[=e]ry the VII."

It is described as a small 4to., printed upon vellum, in Gothic letters,
at London, 1508, by Wynkyn de Worde, and contains 146 leaves. On the
first leaf it has a portcullis, crowned with the motto "Dieu et mon
Droit." On the recto of the last leaf there is--

  "Here endeth the exposycyon of the 7 psalmes. Enprynted at London
  in the fletestrete, at the sygne of ye Sonne, by Wynkyn de Worde.
  In the yere of oure lorde M.CCCCC.VIII. ye 16 day of ye moneth of
  Juyn. The XXIII. yere of ye reygne of our souverayne Lorde Kynge
  H[=e]ry the Seventh."

At the back, there is the sun, the monogram of Wynkyn de Worde--the
letters W. C. displayed as usual--and beneath, "Wynkyn de Worde."

At the beginning of the book, "sur une garde en vélin" (a fly-leaf of
vellum?), there is written in a very neat hand the following ten verses,
the profession of faith of Thomas Morus and of his friend John Fisher,
Bishop of Rochester:

      "The surest meanes for to attaine
      The perfect waye to endlesse blisse
      Are happie lief and to remaine
      W'thin ye church where virtue is;
      And if thy conscience be sae sounde
      To thinse thy faith is truth indeede
      Beware in thee noe schisme be founde
      That unitie may have her meede;
      If unitie thow doe embrace
      In heaven (_en_?)joy possesse thy place."

Beneath--

      "Qui non rectè vivit in unitate ecclesiæ
      Catholicæ, salvus esse non potest."

And lower on the same page--

      "Thomas Morus d[=n]s cancellarius Angliæ
      Joh. Fisher Epûs Roffensis."

It is traditionally reported, upon the testimony of some Anglican
Benedictines (an order now extinct), that the lines which contain the
profession of faith, and those which follow, are in the handwriting of
Bishop Fisher, and that the work was presented by him to the
chancellor, during their imprisonment, when by order of Henry VIII. the
chancellor was denied the consolation of his books.

In the same library there is a fine Psalter, which belonged to Queen
Elizabeth. The _Livre d'Heures_ of Mary Queen of Scots was here also to
be found: "Maria, glorious martyr and Queen of Scotland." It is
conjectured these books were brought to Douai by the fugitive English
Roman Catholic priests. In 1790 their collections were confiscated and
given to the public library of Douai. It would be of interest to
ascertain, if possible, the authenticity of the _Heures à l'Usage_,
stated to have belonged to Mary Queen of Scots. Upon this point one may
be permitted to be sceptical. I have myself seen two. One of these, it
was said, had been used by Mary on the scaffold, and contained a note in
the handwriting, as I think, of James II. attesting the fact. It was
understood to have been obtained from a monastery in France. The other,
a small Prayer Book MS. in vellum, of good execution, had the signature
"M." with a line I think over it of "O Lord, deliver me from my
enemies!" in French. I am, however, now writing from memory, and, in the
first case, of very many years.

Whether the line, "Maria, glorious martyr and Queen of Scotland," be
written in the Psalter, or has been added by the mental excitement of M.
Duthilloeul, the librarian at Douai, I cannot decide. The grand
culmination of "and Queen of Scotland" forms doubtless a very striking
anti-thesis: but neither the possessor of the book nor a priest would
have so sunk the martyr, although a woman and a queen were alike
concerned, as this line does. Lowndes states there is a copy of the
bishop's treatise on vellum at Cambridge. A copy is in the British
Museum; but the title, according, to Lowndes, has _seven_ sermons. It
will be observed the title now given has _ten_.

    S. H.


NOTES ON NEWSPAPERS.

The social elements of society in the seventeenth century were more
simple in their character and development than at the present period.
The population was comparatively small, and therefore the strivings for
success in any pursuit did not involve that severe conflict which is so
frequently the case in the present day. Society then was more of a
community than it is now. It had not public bodies to aid it. It was
left more to its own inherent resources for reciprocal good, and for
mutual help. The temptations to evade and dissemble, in matters of
business, or private and public negotiations, were not so strong as they
now are. Its transactions were more transparent and defined, because
they were fewer and less complicated than many of our own. We readily
grant that society now, in its social, religious, and commercial
aspects, enjoys advantages immeasurably superior to those of any former
period; still there are some few advantages which it had then, that it
cannot possess now. The following advertisements, from the newspapers of
the time, will illustrate the truth of the foregoing remarks:

From a _Collection for Improvement of Husbandry and Trade_.

  Friday, January 26, 1693/4.

  "One that is fit to keep a Warehouse, be a Steward, or do any
  Business that can be supposed an intelligent Man that has been a
  Shopkeeper is fit for, and can give any Security that can be
  desired, as far as Ten Thousand Pound goes, and has some Estate of
  his own, desires an Employment of One hundred Pounds a year, or
  upwards. I can give an account of him."

That a man having 10,000_l._ to give as security, and in possession of
an estate, should require a situation of 100_l._ per annum, sounds oddly
enough in our ears. "I can give an account of him," denotes that the
editor was a man well known and duly appreciated. He appears to have
been a scribe useful in many ways. He was known, and knowing.

  Friday, February 2, 1693/4.

  "A very eminent Brewer, and one I know to be a very honest
  Gentleman, wants an Apprentice. I can give an account of him."

In what sense the word "honest" must here be taken it is difficult to
define. As an eminent brewer, we should naturally conclude he must have
been an honest man. He is here very eminent and very honest.

  Friday March 16, 1693/4.

  "Many Masters want Apprentices, and many Youths want Masters. If
  they apply themselves to me, I'll strive to help them. Also for
  variety of valuable services."

Here is the editor of a paper offering his help to masters and
apprentices for their mutual good. Let us suppose an advertisement of
this kind appearing in _The Times_ of our own day. Printing-house Square
would not contain a tithe of the individuals who would present
themselves for the reception of this accommodating aid. In such a case
the editors (as it regards their particular duties) would be cyphers,
for a continuous absorption of their time would necessarily occur in the
carrying out of this benevolent offer. This advertisement may be
considered as _multum in parvo_, giving the wants of the many in an
announcement of three or four lines, connecting them with a variety of
services which in those days were thought to be valuable. How greatly
are we assisted by these little incidents in forming correct views of
the state of society at that period.

The next advertisement shows the value set upon the services of one who
was to perform the duties of a clerk, and to play well on the violin.

  "If any young Man that plays well on a Violin, and writes a good
  Hand, desires a Clerkship, I can help him to Twenty Pounds a
  year."

Of course twenty pounds was of more value then than it is now: still it
seems a small sum for the performance of such duties, for twelve months.
Here is musical talent required for the amusement of others, in
combination with the daily duties of a particular profession. An
efficient musician, and a good writer, and all for 20_l._ per annum! We
learn by the editor's "I can help him," his readiness to assist all who
would advertise in his journal, to obtain those employments which their
advertisements specified.

  Friday, April 6, 1694.

  "A Grocer of good business desires an Apprentice of good growth."

The "good growth" must have been intended to convey the idea of height
and strength.

My next article shall be devoted to advertisements of another class,
further illustrating the state of society and the peculiarities of the
people at the end of the seventeenth century.

    H. M. BEALBY.

  North Brixton.


TREATISE OF EQUIVOCATION.

As having originated the inquiry in "NOTES AND QUERIES"[1] respecting
this Treatise, under the signature of J. M., I feel great obligation
both to the editor of that journal, and the editor of the Treatise
itself, for having brought it to light by publication, and added it to
the stock of accurate and very important historical information. Indeed,
a real vacancy was left for it; and it is a subject of high
self-gratulation, that a boon previously, and for a length of time,
hidden and unproductive, is now accessible and operative without limit.
I have no doubt that all your readers, and the whole reading public,
join with me in rejoicing that the editorship of the work has fallen
into hands so competent and so successful.

  [Footnote 1: Vol. i., pp. 263. 357.; Vol. ii., pp. 136. 168. 446.
  490.]

I was, not for ten, but twenty years or more, in quest of the MS. now so
happily made public property, and should have fallen upon it much
earlier, but for the misleading title under which it appears, where it
_is_ really; for it has been found. In the _Catalogus Lib. MSS._: Ox.
1697, among the Laudian MSS. appears, p. 62., "968.95. _A Treatise_
against _Equivocation, or fraudulent Dissimulation_." _Against!_ when no
such word is in the original, and the real matter and meaning is _for_!
I had, at some early time, marked the very entry; but presuming that the
work had been actually _printed_ (which I believe it was in a very few
copies, which have disappeared), naturally enough I did not pursue the
search in that direction. Others, I am happy, have, and I am gratified.

The work is very important; for there is not a work more evidently
genuine and authentic than this is proved to be by plain historic
evidence, both as to the document itself and the facts which it attests.
The witness, or witnesses, appearing in it, give their testimony
respecting themselves with the most unsuspectable simplicity. They meant
not, and have not, misrepresented themselves: they have proclaimed their
own doctrine for themselves respecting Equivocation and Mental
Reservation--the last of which is really of most importance; and it was
most needful to the Roman body at the time, and under their
circumstances. Their object, for mere safety, was concealment as to
their resorts or residences. They could not exist, as they did, without
the assistance and knowledge of many individuals, some of inferior
class. Against the incessant inquiries to which they were exposed they
had no defence, except the power of disappointing or misleading by
ambiguity or deception, which was completely secured by reserved
termination in the mind to any uttered declaration. Now, there is in
this very Treatise _plain admission_ that all the co-religionists of the
endangered party, particularly a lady who is distinctly noticed, were
not convinced of the moral rectitude of such a procedure; and it was
necessary, or expedient, that their hesitation should be removed. And
this seems to be the main object of the present work. How far it has
succeeded must depend upon the evidence which is adduced.

We have generally had the doctrine of the Roman body on the subject of
the Treatise presented by opponents; here we have it as deliberately
stated by themselves. There is a passage rather observable in p. 103.,
beginning at the bottom and extending to the words "he hath no such
meaning to tell them," of which we are not acquainted with a duplicate.
But the whole has something of the freshness and interest of novelty.

_Macbeth_, it is agreed, I believe, was written in 1607, consequently
after the Powder Plot, when the doctrine before us was brought forward
pointedly against the traitors. Might there not be some reference to the
fact in the Second Act, where the porter of the castle, roused by
repeated knockings, on the murder, after other exclamations in the
manner of the poet, proceeds:

  "Here's an Equivocator, that could swear in both the scales,
  against either scale: who committed treason enough for God's sake,
  yet could not equivocate to heaven. Oh, come in, Equivocator"?

Mr. Jardine will thank your correspondent for pointing out an error or
two which should be corrected in another edition. At p. 44., for
"χθο," in the margin, should be printed "_sub verbo_." The
word in the MS. is a contraction to that effect: the capital "V" has a
curved stroke across the first line of the "V," followed by "_bo_."
Generally the _Dubium_, in alphabetic works of the kind referred to,
ranks under some alphabetic word, one or more, as it may happen; but in
Em. Sà's work the word _Dubium_ comes under the letter D., and this is
meant to be expressed. At p. 49. the footnote should be omitted, as the
Vulgate, which is followed, calls the 1st of _Samuel_ the 1st of
_Kings_. The first line of p. 56. should have "_autem_" instead of
"_antea_." I have inspected the MS. carefully, and therefore speak with
confidence.

    EUPATOR.


NOTES ON VIRGIL.

(_Continued from_ p. 308.)

      IV. "Illum expirantem transfixo pectore flammas
          Turbine corripuit scopuloque infixit acuto."

          Virg. _Æn._ I. 48.

  "TURBINE; volubilitate ventorum. SCOPULO; saxo
  eminenti."--_Servius._

  "Hub sie im Wirbel empor, und spiesst' an ein scharfes Gestein
  ihn."--_Voss._

  "Ipsum vero Pallas fulmine percussum procellæ vi scopulo etiam
  allisit."--_Heyne._

  "Impegit rupi acutæ."--_Ruæus._

  "Infixit. _Inflixit_, lectionem quorundam MSS. facile prætulissem,
  et quod statim præcesserit _transfixo_, unde evadit inconcinna
  cognatæ dictionis repetitio, et quod etiam Æn. x. 303.:

      "'Namque inflicta vadis, dorso dum pendet iniquo,'

  "si Sidon. Apoll. v. 197. haud tueretur vulgatam scripturam:

                           "'Fixusque Capharei
      Cautibus, inter aquas flammam ructabat Oileus.'"--_Wakefield._

To which criticism of Wakefields's, Forbiger adds: "Præterea etiam acuto
scopulo _infigendi_ voc. accommodatius videtur quam _infligendi_." And
Wagner: "acuto scopulo _infigi_ melius."

This interpretation and these criticisms are founded altogether on a
false conception of the meaning of the word _infigere_, which is never
to fix _on_, but always either to fix _in_, or to fix _with_, i.e.
pierce _with_. _Scopulo infixit acuto_, _fixed or pinned_ down or to the
ground _with_ a sharp rock; _i.e._ hurled a sharp-pointed rock on him,
so as to nail him to the ground. So (_Æn._ XII. 721.) "Cornua obnixi
infigunt," fix their horns, not _on_, but _in_; infix their horns; stick
their horns into each other; stick each other with their horns: _q.d._
Cornibus se mutuo infigunt: and, exactly parallel to our text:

      "Saturnius me sic _infixit_ Jupiter,
      Jovisque numen Mulcibri adscivit manus.
      Hos ille _cuneos_ fabrica crudeli _inserens_,
      Perrupit artus; qua miser sollertia
      Transverberatus, castrum hoc Furiarum incolo."

      Cicero (translating from Æschylus), _Tuscul. Quæst._ II. 10.

In confirmation of this view of the passage, I may observe: 1st, that it
is easier to imagine a man staked to the ground by a sharp-pointed rock,
than flung on a sharp-pointed rock, so as to remain permanently impaled
on it; and 2dly, that the account given of the transaction, both by
Quintus Calaber and Seneca, agree as perfectly with this view as they
disagree with the opposite:

      Καί νύ κεν ἐξήλυξε κακὸν μόρον, εἰ μὴ ἄρ'αὐτῷ,

      ῥήξας αἶαν ἔνερθεν, ἐπιπροέηκε κολώνην·

      εὖτε πάρος μεγάλοιο κατ' Ἐγκελάδοιο δαΐφρων

      Παλλὰς ἀειραμένη Σικελὴν ἐπικάββαλε νῆσον·

      ἦ ῥ' ἔτι καίεται αἰὲν ὑπ' ἀκαμάτοιο Γίγαντος,

      αἰθαλόεν πνείοντος ἔσω χθονός· ὡς ἄρα Λοκρῶν

      ἀμφεκάλυψεν ἄνακτα δυσάμμορον οὔρεος ἄκρη,

      ὑψόθεν ἐξεριποῦσα, βάρυνε δὲ καρτερὸν ἄνδρα·

      ἀμφὶ δέ μιν θανάτοιο μέλας ἐκιχήσατ' ὄλεθρος,

      γαίῃ ὁμῶς δμηθέντα καὶ ἀκαμάτῳ ἐνὶ πόντῳ.

      Quintus Calab. XIV. 579.

And so Seneca; who, having presented us with Ajax clinging to the rock
to which he had swum for safety, after his ship had been sunk, and
himself struck with lightning, and there uttering violent imprecations
against the Deity, adds:

                "Plura cum auderet furens,
      Tridente rupem subruit pulsam pater
      Neptunus, imis exerens undis caput,
      Solvitque montem; quem cadens secum tulit:
      Terraque et igne victus et pelago jacet."

      _Agam._ 552.

And, so also, beyond doubt, we are to understand Sidonius
Apollinaris's--

                                "Fixusque Capharei
      Cautibus, inter aquas flammam ructabat Oileus."

Not, with Wakefield and the other commentators, _fixed on_ the rocks of
Caphareus, but, _pierced with_ the rocks of Caphareus, and lying under
them. Compare (_Æn._ IX. 701.) "fixo pulmone," the pierced lung; "fixo
cerebro" (_Æn._ XII. 537.); "verubus trementia figunt" (_Æn._ I. 216.),
not, fix _on_ the spits, but, stick or pierce _with_ the spits; and
especially (Ovid. _Ibis._ 341.),

      "Viscera sic aliquis scopulus tua figat, ut olim
        Fixa sub Euboico Graia fuere sinu,"

pierced and pinned down with a rock, at the bottom of the Euboean gulf.

TURBINE. SCOPULO.--Not two instruments, _a whirlwind and a rock_, but
one single instrument, _a whirling rock_; scopulo turbineo; in modo
turbinis se circumagente; as if Virgil had said, Solo affixit illum
correptum et transverberatum scopulo acuto in eum maxima vi rotato: or,
more briefly, Turbine scopuli acuti corripuit et infixit. Compare:

      "Præcipitem scopulo atque ingentis turbine saxi
      Excutit effunditque solo."--_Æn._ XII. 531.

                            "Stupet obvia leto
      Turba super stantem, atque emissi turbine montis
      Obruitur."--Stat. _Theb._ II. 564.

      "Idem altas turres saxis et turbine crebro
      Laxat."--Stat. _Theb._ X. 742.

So understood, 1st, the passage is according to Virgil's usual manner,
the latter part of the line explaining and defining the general
statement contained in the former; and, 2ndly, Pallas kills her enemy,
not by the somewhat roundabout and unusual method of first striking him
with thunder, and then snatching him up in a whirlwind, and then either
dashing him against a sharp rock, and leaving him impaled there, or, as
I have shown is undoubtedly the meaning, impaling him with a sharp rock,
but by the more compendious and less out-of-the-way method of first
striking him with thunder, and then whirling a sharp-pointed rock on top
of him, so as to impale him.

From Milton's imitation of this passage, in his _Paradise Lost_ (ii.
180.), it appears that even he fell into the general and double error:

      "Caught in a fiery tempest shall be hurled,
      Each on his rock transfixed."

Caro's translation shows that he had no definite idea whatever of the
meaning:

                          "A tale un turbo
      In preda il diè; che per acuti scogli
      Miserabil ne fe' rapina, e scempio."

       *       *       *       *       *

      V. "Ast ego, quæ Divûm incedo regina, Jovisque
         Et soror et conjux, una cum gente tot annos
         Bella gero."--_Æn._ I. 50.

  "'INCEDERE' wird besonders von der feierlichen, würdevollen
  Haltung im Gange gebraucht: vers 500, von der Dido, 'Regina
  incessit.' (Ruhnk. zu _Terent. And._ I. i. 100. _Eun._ v. 3. 9.)
  Deshalb der majestätischen Juno eigenthümlich, Ἡραῖον
  βαδίζειν. Also nicht für _sum_, sondern ganz
  eigentlich."--_Thiel._

      "But I who walk in awful state above."

      _Dryden._

  "_Incedere_ est _ingredi_, sed proprie cum quadam pompa et
  fastu."--_Gesner._

  "Incessus dearum, imprimis Junonis, gravitate sua
  notus."--_Heyne._

And so also Holdsworth and Ruæus.

I think, on the contrary, that _incedo_, both here and elsewhere,
expresses only the stepping or walking motion generally, and that the
character of the step or walk, if inferable at all, is to be inferred
only from the context. Accordingly, "Magnifice incedit" (Liv. II. 6.);
"Turpe incedere" (Catull. XXXXII. 8.); "Molliter incedit" (Ovid, _Amor._
II. 23.); "Passu incedit inerti" (Ovid, _Metam._ II. 772.); "Melius est
incessu regem quam imperium regno claudicare" (Justin. VI. ii. 6.);
"Incessus omnibus animalibus certus et uniusmodi, et in suo, cuique,
genere" (Plin. X. 38.).

The emphasis, therefore, is on _regina_, and the meaning is, _I who
step, or walk, QUEEN of the Gods_; the dignity of the step being not
expressed by "incedo," but inferable from "regina." The expression
corresponds exactly to "ibit regina" (_Æn._ II. 578.); with this
difference only, that "ibit" does not, like "incedo," specify motion on
foot.

"Jovisque et soror et conjux."--Both the _ets_ are emphatic. "Jovisque
_et_ soror _et_ conjux."

"Bella" expresses the organised resistance which she meets, and the
uncertainty of the issue; and being placed first word in the line is
emphatic.

    JAMES HENRY.


Minor Notes.

_Verses presented to General Monck._--The subjoined notice of a curious
entry in the records of the Belfast corporation may be acceptable. The
author is unknown. They are inscribed, "Verses to General Monck," and,
as the last six lines show, are an attack on the Rump Parliament:--

      Advants George Monck, and Monck St. George shall be,
      England's restorer to its liberty,
      Scotland's protector, Ireland's president,
      Reducing all to affree parliament.
      And if thou dost intend the other thing,
      Go on, and all shall cry God save ye king.

        R. R doth rebellion represent,
        V. By V nought else but villainy is meant,
        M. M murther signifies all men doe knowe,
        P. P perjuries in fashion grow.

            Then R and V with M and P
            Conjoined make up our misery.

The occasion of their presentation is unknown. General Monck took
Belfast in 1646 from the Scotch, who being true Presbyterians of the
older school, had turned against the parliament. This was the probable
occasion of their being presented to the future restorer of King Charles
II.

    E. L. B.

_Justice to Pope Pius V._--You have done yourself credit by exonerating
Queen Elizabeth from a charge the easiest to bring, and the most
difficult to rebut, implying the proof of a negative; and therefore
frequently brought by the unprincipled. I propose, as a counterpart, to
exonerate Pope Pius V. from an imputation, mistakingly, though unjustly,
cast upon him by an authority of no less weight than that of Sir Walter
Scott. In his edition of _Somers's Tracts_, vol. i. p. 192., occurs a
note on a place in the _execution of justice_: "Pius V. resolved to make
his bastard son, Boncompagni, Marquis of Vincola, King of Ireland," &c.
For this assertion no authority is cited, nor indeed could be. The very
name might have suggested the filiation to his successor, Gregory XIII.,
which was the fact. In a work, not much known, _The Burnt Child dreads
the Fire, &c._, by William Denton, M.D., London, 1675, at p. 25. we
read, "Gregory XIII. had a bastard, _James Buon Compagna_, and to him he
gave _Ireland_, and impowered _Stewkely_ with men, arms, and money, to
conquer it for him."[2] There is no reason to doubt, that with the
editor of the _Tracts_ the above imputation was a simple mistake; but it
is an important duty of all who interfere with historical literature, to
state and correct every discovered instance of the kind.

  [Footnote 2: Camden, in his _Elizabeth_, under 1578, states the
  fact without mention of the name, only calling him "the pope's
  bastard;" but the date is the sixth year of the pontificate of
  Gregory XIII.]

    EUPATOR.




Queries.


CROSSES AND CRUCIFIXES.

In the 22nd volume of the _Archæologia_, p. 58., is the following
passage:

  "The cross, which does not appear to have been peculiar to
  Christianity, when introduced on these obelisks, is usually filled
  with tracery."

The obelisks, or stones of memorial, referred to are the subjects of a
very interesting paper communicated by Mr. Logan to the Society of
Antiquaries. (See Plates 2, 3, 4, and 5.) I am desirous of being
informed what authenticated instances there are of crosses, or stones
marked with crosses, being used for landmarks, memorials, or for any
other purpose, civil or religious, before the introduction of
Christianity? I have met with one instance. Prescott, in his _History of
Mexico_, relates that--

  "In the court of one of the temples in the island of Columel he
  was amazed by the sight of a cross of stone and lime, about ten
  palms high."

It was the emblem of the god of rain (See vol. i. p. 240., &c.)

In the same paper Mr. Logan observes--

  "Crosses, or stones on which the figure was traced, marked a place
  of meeting for certain districts; and within memory of man a fair
  was held on this spot. It is not improbable that market-crosses
  may be deduced from this custom."

It seems that every town that had the privilege of a market or fair (I
am speaking of England) had a market-cross. In most of these towns the
cross has disappeared, and in its place a ball or globe has been mounted
on the shaft; but the term "market-cross" is still in use. In the town
of Giggleswick, in the parish of Giggleswick, there is a perfect
market-cross, the cross being what is, I believe, called a cross-fleury.
In the town of Settle, in the same parish of Giggleswick, the ball or
globe is placed on the top of the shaft. Are there other instances of
market towns in which the cross is still found?

I passed through a market town lately in which the stone steps, and
socket in which the shaft was placed, are preserved; but they have been
removed to one corner of the market-place. The shaft and cross have
disappeared.

Is not this erection of the cross, in places in which markets and fairs
were held, of ecclesiastical origin? Was the cross erected by licence
granted by the bishop within whose jurisdiction it was placed? Is there
any grant of such licence in existence? Or did these crosses originate
in the gratuitous piety of our ancestors? I fear to ask the question,
whether the buyers and sellers under the cross are more upright in their
dealings than those who buy and sell without the presence of this emblem
of all that is true and just. Is the cross erected in the cities and
towns of other states, as in England? Was the custom general in Europe?

    F. W. J.

Mr. Curzon states, in the introduction to his _Monasteries of the
Levant_, that--

  "The crucifix was not known before the fifth or sixth century,
  though the cross was always the emblem of the Christian faith."

I am persuaded that this assertion is incorrect, and that the crucifix
was used in much earlier times. Will some one kindly inform me where the
first mention of it is to be found, and what is the date of the earliest
examples now known?

    DRYASDUST.


MASTER OF THE BUCKHOUNDS.

In reading the _Topographer_ for January 1791 (a work which was
published under the editorship of my uncle, Sir Egerton Brydges), I was
surprised to find, in an account of the family of Brocas, of
Beaurepaire, in the county of Hampshire, that the post of Master of the
Buckhounds had been sold in the reign of James I.

Mr. Gough (_Sepulchral Monuments_, pp. 160, 161.) appears to be the
authority quoted who describes the monument of Sir Bernard Brocas, Kt.,
as existing at Westminster, and having on it an inscription in which is
the following sentence:

  "Sir Bernard succeeded to the paternal inheritance both in England
  and France, and having married Mary, daughter and heiress of Sir
  John de Roche, had a large estate with her, and the hereditary
  post of Master of the Buckhounds; which was confirmed to him by
  King Edward the Third, and held by the family, till sold in James
  the First's reign."

I have no means of ascertaining at the present time whether this
monument is still in existence or not; nor indeed has that much to do
with the object of my writing, which is to suggest the following
Queries, in the hope that some of your correspondents may be able to
send satisfactory answers.

1. By whom was the post of Master of the Buckhounds first instituted,
and who was the first Master?

2. Is there any list of persons holding this office; and if so, where
may it be seen?

3. Is there any instance of an unmarried lady having held it: for in the
case before us we see that a lady was able to convey it by inheritance
to her husband?

4. By whom was it sold? Was it by the last hereditary possessor; and if
so, what was his name? Or was it by the king, on the death of one of the
possessors, for the purpose of enriching himself?

5. Is it known whether there is any other instance of its having been
sold: and when did it come to be, as now, a ministerial office?

    JOHN BRANFILL HARRISON.

  Maidstone.


Minor Queries.

300. "_No Cross no Crown._"--Where did Penn get the title of his
well-known work? St. Paulinus, Bishop of Nola, in allusion to the custom
of crowning crosses, has these lines:--

      "Cerne coronatam Domini super _atria Christi_,
      Stare crucem, duro spondentem celsa labori
      Præmia: _tolle crucem, qui vis auferre coronam_."

      "See how the cross of Christ a crown entwines:
      High o'er God's temple it refulgent shines;
      Pledging bright guerdon for each passing pain:
      Take up the cross, if thou the crown would'st gain."

Vide Dr. Rock's _Hierurgia_. Quarles says, in his _Esther_:

      "The way to bliss lies not on beds of down,
      And he that had no cross deserves no crown."

    MARICONDA.

301. _Dido and Æneas._--

      "When Dido found Æneas did not come,
      She wept in silence, and was--di-do-dum."

Who was the author of the above well-known bit of philology?

    A. A. D.

302. _Pegs and Thongs for Rowing: Torture among the Athenians._--Dr.
Schmitz (in Smith's _Antiq._, article SHIPS) speaks of "the pegs,
σκαλμοί, _between which the oars move[d]_, and to which they
were fastened by a thong, τροπωτήρ." What is the authority for
two pegs, _between which_, &c? A single peg and thong, as still in
frequent use, would be intelligible!

Dr. Smith observes (ap. id. p. 1139.) that the decree of Scamandrius,
which ordained that no free Athenian should be tortured, "does not
appear to have interdicted torture as a means of execution, _since_ we
find Demosthenes (_de Cor._ 271.) reminding the judges that they had put
Antiphon to death by the rack." Does it not escape him that Antiphon was
_then an alien_, having suffered expulsion from the Lexiarchic list.
(See Dem. _l.c._)

    A. A. D.

303. _French Refugees._--Where is the treaty or act of parliament to be
found which guaranteed compensation to the French refugees at the end of
the war? Is it possible to obtain a list of those who received
compensation, and the amount paid; and if so, where?

    S. QUARTO.

304. _Isabel, Queen of the Isle of Man._--In Charles Knight's _London_
mention is made, amongst the noble persons buried in the church of the
Grey Friars, of Isabel, wife of Baron Fitzwarren, sometime queen of the
Isle of Man. Will you or some of your correspondents be so kind as to
tell me who this lady was, and when the Isle of Man ceased to be an
independent kingdom?

    FANNY.

305. _Grand-daughter of John Hampden._--According to the _Friend of
India_ of 4th September, 1851, there is at Cossimbazar the following
inscription:--

            "SARAH MATTOCKS,
                Aged 27.
        Much lamented by her husband,
      Lieutenant-Colonel JOHN MATTOCKS.
        Was the grand-daughter of the
          Great JOHN HAMDEN, Esq.,
          Of St. James's, Westminster."

In the following number (dated 11th September, 1851), the editor offers
an apology for having omitted the date of the decease of Mrs. Mattocks,
viz. 1778; and then remarks that--

  "As she was twenty-seven years old at her death, she must have
  been born in 1751; it was therefore impossible that she should
  have been the grand-daughter of the great John Hampden, that died
  in 1643, one hundred and eight years before her birth."

Query, Can any of your correspondents give me any information respecting
the subject?

    SALOPIAN.

306. _Cicada or Tettigonia Septemdecim._--In Latrobe's _Rambler in North
America_, London, 1835, vol. ii. p. 290., is a curious account of this
insect, which visits Pennsylvania every seventeenth year, and appears
about May 24. It is under an inch in length when it first appears early
in the morning, and gains its strength after the sun has risen. These
insects live ten or fifteen days, and never seem to eat any food. They
come in swarms, and birds, pigs, and poultry fatten on them. The female
lays her eggs in the outermost twigs of the forest; these die and drop
on the ground. The eggs give birth to a number of small grubs, which are
thus enabled to attain the mould without injury, and in it they
disappear; they are forgotten till seventeen years pass, and then the
memory of them returns, and they rise from the earth, piercing their way
through the matted sod, the hard trampled clay, &c. They appeared in
1749, &c., to 1834, and are expected in 1851. Has this expectation been
fulfilled?

    C. I. R.

307. _The British Sidanen._--Under this title (the proper spelling in
which should be _Sina_ or _Senena_) an article appears in Vol. iv., p.
120., comprising a portion of the genealogy of the Welsh princess, in
which three of her sons are mentioned, viz., Owen, Llewellyn, and David.
But there was a _fourth_ son, Roderic, who settled in England, and
appears to have been residing there for some time, when the fatal
rupture occurred between the two countries. It would appear that
descendants of his have lived, and are living in our own times; among
them, the late Dr. John Mawer, of Middleton Tyas, whose remarkable
epitaph was given in a former number of "NOTES AND QUERIES." My first
inquiry is, Is there known to exist any genealogy assuming to extend
between the Rev. and learned gentleman just named and Prince Roderic? I
am told there was one published in the _British Peerage for 1706_, at
which time John Mawer would be three years of age; is such the fact? I
wish also to ask, whether Prince _Owen_ was in existence at the time of
the deaths of Llewellyn and David--whether in Wales or England? and
whether he was the ancestor of Owen Tudor, the proud father of Henry
VII.; and, if not, who _was_ Owen Tudor's ancestor?

    AMANUENSIS.

308. _Jenings or Jennings._--Was the late Mr. Jenings of Acton Hall,
Suffolk, descended from the family of Jenings, formerly of Silsden,
Skipton in Craven, and afterwards of Ripon, Yorkshire; and if so, where
can information as to the pedigree be obtained?

    A. B. C.

  Brighton.

309. _Caleva Atrebatum, Site of._--May not the site of Caleva Atrebatum
have been at Caversham, on the north of the Thames, near Reading?

The distance of Caleva from Londinium was forty-four Roman miles, making
forty English; and from Venta Belgarum, thirty-six Roman or thirty-three
English miles.

Caleva, according to Ptolemy's map, was on the north of the Thames; a
portion of the present Oxfordshire being in the country assigned by the
same geographer to the Atrebates.

    G. J.

310. _Abigail._--Whence, or when, originated the application of
_Abigail_, as applied to a lady's maid? It is used by Dean Swift in this
sense; but in a way that shows that it was no new phrase in those days.

    J. S. WARDEN.

  Balica.

311. _Etymology of Durden._--Jacob, in his _Law Dictionary_, giving
Cowel as his authority (who, however, advances no further elucidation),
derives the word from _dur-den_, a coppice in a valley. Does the word
_dur_ signify wood, or, if the British _dwr_, is it not water?

    F. R. R.

312. _Connecticut Halfpenny._--I have a halfpenny, apparently American,
bearing on the obverse, a head to the right, and "Auctori Connect.;" and
on the reverse, "Inde." for _independence_, and "Lib." for liberty; date
in the exerg., 1781 or 1787; and between "Inde." and "Lib." five stars.
Can any of your correspondents tell me if my explanation of the reverse
is the correct one? and also who was the "_Auctori Connect._," or
founder of the state of Connecticut?

    J. N. C.

  King's Lynn.


Minor Queries Answered.

_Arms displayed on Spread Eagle._--For what reason are the arms of
Methwen (and some others, I believe) placed on the breast of a
two-headed eagle displayed sable?

    H. N. E.

  [When armorial ensigns are borne upon the breast of an eagle, the
  general inference is that the bearers thereof are Counts of the
  Holy Roman Empire, it being the practice in Germany for Counts of
  the Empire so to display the eagle.

  There are some cases in which especial grants have been made to
  Englishmen so to do, as in the case of the family of _Methwen_;
  and persons having received the royal licence in England to accept
  the dignity of Count of the Empire, so carry their arms, as in the
  cases of Earl Cowper, Lord Arundel of Wardour, St. Paul, &c.]

_St. Beuno._--Where can I obtain any information respecting St. Beuno,
to whom I find several churches dedicated in Wales?

    J. D. D.

  [In Rees's _Essay on the Welsh Saints_, p. 268., and Williams's
  _Ecclesiastical Antiquities of the Cymry_, p. 137. The college of
  Beuno is now called Clynog Vawr. See also _The Cambro-Briton_,
  vol. iii. p. 14.]

_Lists of Knights Bachelor._--What publication contains a list of the
_knights bachelor_ made by George I. and George II. (1714-1760)? With
regard to the subsequent reign I have found the _Calendar of Knights_,
by Francis Townsend, London, 1828, very accurate and perfect.

    ==> N.

  [There is not any continuous list of _Knights Bachelors_ in any
  published works since Philpot's _Catalogue_, 1660, until
  Townsend's _Calendar_, which commences in 1760. The knights made
  by Kings George I. and II. will be found only in some of the
  genealogical publications of the day, such as the _British
  Compendium_, published at intervals between 1720 and 1769;
  Chamberlayne's _State of Great Britain_; or Heylin's _Help to
  English History_, or Phillipps's _List of Nobility_, and similar
  works.

  Mr Townsend contemplated the publication of a list, and left an
  imperfect MS., which passed into the hands of Sir Thomas
  Phillipps, who printed it; but though privately circulated, it was
  never published. See Moule's _Bibliotheca Heraldica_ for various
  works of the character referred to.]

_Walker._--An American lady lecturing on Bloomerism last week was much
puzzled by the audience bursting into roars of laughter upon her
quoting Professor Walker as an authority for some statement. The roars
redoubled upon her declaring her belief that Professor Walker was a most
respectable and trustworthy person. Can any one explain the origin of
the joke that lies in the name "Walker?" Why do people say "Walker" when
they wish to express ridicule or disbelief of a questionable statement?

    DAVUS.

  [The history of the renowned "Hookey Walker," as related by John
  Bee, Esq., is simply this:--John Walker was an out-door clerk at
  Longman, Clementi, and Co.'s in Cheapside, where a great number of
  persons were employed; and "Old Jack," who had a crooked or hooked
  nose, occupied the post of a spy upon their aberrations, which
  were manifold. Of course, it was for the interests of the
  surveillants to throw discredit upon all Jack's reports to the
  heads of the firm; and numbers could attest that those reports
  were fabrications, however true. Jack, somehow or other, was
  constantly outvoted, his evidence superseded, and of course
  disbelieved; and thus his occupation ceased, but not the fame of
  "Hookey Walker."]

_See of Durham._--Can any of your readers inform me of "The privileges
of, and the ancient customs appertaining to, the See of Durham?"

    H. F.

  Clapham, Nov. 3. 1851.

  [These relate most probably to the palatine rights of the Bishops
  of Durham, granted by Egfrid, King of Northumbria, in 685; when he
  gave to St. Cuthbert all the land between the Wear and the Tyne,
  called "the patrimony of St. Cuthbert," to hold in as full and
  ample a manner as the king himself holds the same. This donative,
  with its ancient customs and privileges, was confirmed by the
  Danes, and afterwards by William the Conqueror; in addition to
  which, the latter made the church a sanctuary, and the county a
  palatinate. Its bishop was invested with as great a power and
  prerogative within his see, as the king exercised without the
  bounds of it, with regard to forfeitures, &c. Thus it was a kind
  of royalty subordinate to the crown, and, by way of eminence, was
  called _The Bishoprick_. For an account of the ancient customs
  connected with the cathedral, our correspondent is referred to the
  curious and interesting work of Davies of Kidwelly, entitled, _The
  Ancient Rites and Monuments of the Monastical and Cathedral Church
  of Durham_, 12mo. 1672, which has been republished by the Surtees
  Society.]




Replies.

CONVOCATION OF YORK.

(Vol. iv., p. 368.)

This body (of which I am a member) ought to meet on the same occasions
with that of Canterbury; but owing to the neglect or the wilfulness of
its officials, many omissions and mistakes occur. I have heard a
commission to _further_ adjourn the Convocation, from a day to which it
previously stood adjourned, read the day _after_ that on which it ought
to have assembled, but which day had arrived and passed without any one
recollecting the fact! Our Convocation appears at no time to have acted
a very prominent part, though its constitution is far better fitted for
a working synod than that of the southern province. In the latter the
_parochial_ clergy are so inadequately represented as to be much
outnumbered by the _dignitaries_ appointed by the crown and the bishops;
but in York there are _two_ proctors chosen by the clergy of _each_
archdeaconry and peculiar jurisdiction, and _two_ by each cathedral
chapter; thus affording a complete counterpoise to the deans and
archdeacons who are members _ex officio_. Another peculiarity in the
Convocation of York is, that it assembles in _one_ house, the bishops
commonly appearing by their proxies (priests), and the archbishop
presiding by his commissioner, who is always the dean, or one of the
residentiary canons of York.

In 1462 (_temp._ Archbishop Booth) the Convocation of York decreed that
such constitutions of the province of Canterbury as were not prejudicial
to those of York should be received, incorporated, and deemed as their
own (Wilkins's _Concilia_, vol. iii. p. 580.). Under Archbishop
Grenefeld it was decreed that since the Archbishop of York hath no
superior in spirituals except the Pope, no appeals should be suffered to
the Archbishop of Canterbury (p. 663.). At an earlier period the
northern metropolitan laid claim to all England north of the Humber,
with the whole realm of Scotland (Wilkins, vol. i. pp. 325, 479, &c.).
In a provincial council at London, A.D. 1175, his jurisdiction was
denied over the sees of Lincoln, _Chester_, Worcester, and Hereford,
upon which he appealed to the Pope. With the exception of Chester,
however, none of these sees were finally retained in the province.

The next year we are told that, in a (national) council at Westminster,
the Pope's legate presiding, the Archbishop of York, "disdaining to sit
at the left hand of the legate, forced himself into the lap of the
Archbishop of Canterbury, but was immediately _knocked down_ by the
other bishops and clergy, severely beaten, and thrust out of the
council!" (Hoveden ap. Wilkins, vol. i. p. 485.) How far the Northern
Convocation supported their burly prelate in these claims I do not know;
but I _note_ that in those days the disorderly conduct of the clergy was
_not_ made a pretext for the indefinite suspension of synodical
functions; and I _query_ whether the clergy might not be trusted to
behave quite as well in the nineteenth century.

But to return to the Convocation of York. There is a curious letter,
A.D. 1661, from Accepted Frewen, Archbishop of York, to the Convocation,
desiring them to send up to London some of their members duly
commissioned on their part to sit with the Lower House of Canterbury
for the review of the Liturgy. In this letter the archbishop says that
himself and the other bishops of the province were sitting _with the
bishops of the southern province in their House_. A similar expedient
for constituting a _quasi_-national synod seems to have been resorted to
upon some earlier occasions; but the Convocation of York still passed in
due form by their own separate decree what was so agreed upon. The
Articles were thus subscribed by our Convocation in 1571, and the Canons
in 1604 and 1640.

Since then the Convocation of York has been regularly summoned, met,
adjourned, and been prorogued, without even the dutiful address to the
crown, which is regularly discussed and adopted in Canterbury. In the
year 1847, a spasmodic attempt at life was manifested in this venerable
and ill-used institution. Archbishop Harcourt had consented that an
address to the crown should be adopted, and himself procured a draft to
be approved by the bishops. His grace however died before the day of
meeting. Some difficulty was experienced by the officials, both in York
and London, as to the course to be pursued; but a precedent having been
pointed out in the reign of James I., when Archbishop Hutton died after
summoning the Convocation and before its assembly, a writ was issued
from the crown to the dean and chapter at York to elect a _præses_ for
the Convocation during the vacancy of the archbishoprick. They appointed
the canon who happened to be in residence; an unusually large attendance
was given; the Convocation was opened, the names called over, and then
the officials had reached the limit of their experience; according to
_their_ precedents we ought all to have been sent away. The address
however was called on by the _præses_, being apparently quite unaware
that a _prolocutor_ should be chosen by the clergy before they proceeded
to business. Such an officer probably seemed to the dignitary already in
the chair like a _second King of Brentford_ "smelling at one rose," and
the demand was refused. Further difficulties ensued, of course, the
moment the debate was opened; and finally, the _præses_, determined not
to be tempted out of his depth, rose all at once, and read the fatal
_formula_ which restored our glorious Chapter House to its silent
converse with the ghosts. The Convocation has never since been heard of.

    CAN EBOR.


THE OLD COUNTESS OF DESMOND.

(Vol. iv., p. 305.)

If your correspondent A. B. R. will refer to Walpole's _Fugitive Pieces_
he will find a minute inquiry into the person and age of this long-lived
lady. This is doubtless the dissertation alluded to by C. (Vol. ii., p.
219.) Pennant has _two_ notices of the countess in his Scotch tours. In
that of 1769 (which somewhat strangely follows the one of 1772), he
gives at p. 87. the engraving spoken of (Vol. iv., p. 306.), apparently
taken from the original at Dupplin Castle. It differs a little from R.'s
description of another portrait, as the cloak is strapped over the
chest, not held by a button. In 1772 Pennant again describes this
portrait in his _Tour in Scotland_, vol. ii. p. 88., and speaks of four
others, viz., first, at Devonshire House; second, at the Hon. John
Yorke's seat, near Cheltenham; third, at Mr. Scott's, printer; and the
fourth, in the Standard Closet, Windsor Castle. At the back of the last
is written with a pen "Rembrandt." "A mistake (says P.) as Rembrandt was
not fourteen years of age (he was indeed only eight) in 1614, at which
time it is certain the countess was not living."

In my copy of the _Fugitive Pieces_ (the Strawberry Hill edition,
presented by Walpole to Cole), I find the following manuscript note by
Cole; _an amplification of the_ passage from Walpole's letters quoted at
p. 306.:--

  "Being at Strawberry Hill in April, 1773, I saw there a copy of
  the picture commonly attributed to the old Countess of Desmond;
  but Mr. Walpole told me that there is sufficient proof that it is
  a painter's mother, I think Rembrandt's. However, by a letter from
  Mr. Lort, April 15, 1774, he assures me that on Mr. Pennant's
  calling at Strawberry Hill to see this picture, he was much
  chagrined at having a print of it engraved for his book, till Mr.
  Lort revived him by carrying him to a garret in Devonshire House,
  where was a picture of this same countess with her name on it,
  exactly corresponding to his engraved print. I remember a
  tolerable good old picture of her at Mr. Dicey's, prebendary of
  Bristol, at Walton in Bucks."

Walpole could not dismiss Pennant without a disparaging remark. He is "a
superficial man, and knows little of history or antiquity; but he has a
violent rage for being an author." Those who live in glass houses should
not throw stones: Pennant would not have displayed the ignorance which
Walpole exhibits in the instance before us. In an inscription, which the
latter gives, on a Countess of Desmond buried at Sligo, occurs the
following contraction: "Desmoniæ _Noie_ Elizabetha." Walpole says
(_Fugitive Pieces_, p. 204.), "This word I can make no sense of, but
_sic originale_; I take it to be redundancy of the carver. It seems to
be a repetition of the last three syllables of Desmoniæ!"

The sarcastic observations which Walpole passes on the Society of
Antiquaries, its members, and its publications, are so frequent and so
bitter, that they must have been founded on some offence not to be
pardoned. Were the remarks on the "Historic Doubts" by the president,
Dean Milles, and by the Rev. Robert Masters (printed in the first two
volumes of the _Archæologia_), regarded as satisfactorily confuting
Walpole's arguments; or did he aim, but unsuccessfully, at the
president's chair?

    J. H. M.

  Bath.


COINS OF VABALATHUS.

(Vol. iv., p. 255.)

There have been many attempts to explain the puzzling VCRIMDR, on the
supposition that a Latin sentence was concealed under these letters.
Pinkerton suggested "Voluntate Cæsaris Romani Imperatoris Maximi Domini,
Rex." I hope to offer a better solution, which, although not new, has
been passed over, I believe, by all subsequent writers. The Rev. George
North, in the _Museum Meadianum_, p. 97., gives the following note:
"Apud Arabes accepi verbum Karama significare Honoravit, a quo Ucrima,
et Ucrim; quo sensu respondet hoc Arabicum Τῷ Σεβαστῷ apud
Græcos." On applying to a well-known scholar and linguist here, I found
that from the verb _Karama_ there was derived the adjective _Kar[=i]mat_
(nobilis), from which again the superlative _Akram_ comes. There can, I
think, be little doubt that the word VCRIMDR is originally derived from
this verb _Karama_, and that it is most probably equivalent to
_Nobilissimus_, a title so common shortly afterwards, as applied to the
heirs to the empire.[3]

  [Footnote 3: "_Nobilissimus_, in the Byzantine historians, is
  synonymous with Cæsar."--_Niebuhr._]

The word ϹΡΩΙΑϹ or ϹΡΙΑϹ, which appears on the
Alexandrian coins of this prince, is of more difficult explanation. Some
think it a prænomen, some a Syriac or other Eastern title, perhaps
corresponding to VCRIMDR. Pellerin thought so. I hope some Oriental
scholar will direct his attention to this point. These coins are very
often ill struck, so that the part of the legend below the head, where
the word in question is found, is indistinct, for which reason I suppose
MR. TAYLOR has followed the erroneous reading of Banduri, ΕΡΜΙΑϹ
(properly ϵΡΜΙΑϹ, with lunate epsilon) for ϹΡΩΙΑϹ,
which has been corrected by Eckhel. Of three specimens which I
possess, one only reads clearly ϹΡΩΙΑϹ, from the
above-mentioned cause, but it is unquestionably the correct reading on
all. The best arrangement of the legend, from analogy with those forms
used by the Romans, is as follows:

      ΑΥΤοκρατωρ . ϹΡΩΙΑϹ . ΟΥΑΒΑΛΛΑΘΟϹ . ΑΘΗΝΟδωρου . Υιος.

The existence of coins, of which I possess a specimen also, reading

      Α . ϹΡΙΑϹ . ΟΥΑΒΑΛΛΑΘΟϹ . ΑΘΗΝ . Υ.

shows that we must not read ΑΘΗΝΟΥ as one word, but must
divide it as above. I think MR. TAYLOR will find his specimen to read as
the last-mentioned coin, the ΕΡ (properly ϵΡ) being ϹΡ, and the ΑΥ
in like manner ΑϹ. My coin gives the whole legend distinctly, and
I can vouch for the exactitude of the above legend.

I believe there appeared some years ago, in the _Revue de Numismatique_,
an article on the coins of the Zenobian family, but I do not remember
when it was published, nor the conclusions to which the writer came.
That is, however, the most recent investigation of the subject, and to
it I must refer MR. TAYLOR, as I have not access to that periodical
here.

Sir Gardner Wilkinson has published in the _Numismatic Chronicle_, vol.
vii. or viii., an inscription containing the names of Zenobia and
Vabalathus. After the name of Vabalathus, who has the title of
Autocrator, is the word ΑΘΗΝΟΔΩΡΟΥ, which justifies the
reading Αθηνοδωρου Υιος on the coins. Vabalathus is thus
probably the son of Zenobia by a former husband, Athenodorus, while
bearing himself the same name, as Vabalathus (better Vaballathus, as on
the Alexandrian coins) is said to be equivalent to Athenodorus, Gift of
Pallas.

    W. H. S.

  Edinburgh.


MARRIAGE OF ECCLESIASTICS.

(Vol. iv., pp. 57, 125, 193, 196, 298.)

I entirely agree with you that your pages are not a fit battle-ground
for theological controversy. Still, since the question of the
translation of Heb. xiii. 4. has been mooted, I beg with much deference
to suggest that it will not be quite right to let it fall to the ground
unsettled, especially since CEPHAS has thought fit to charge those of
our Reformers who translated the Scriptures with mistranslating
advisedly, and with propagating new doctrines.

CEPHAS'S version of the passage is right, and our English version is
wrong; but the fault lies in the ignorance of our translators, an
ignorance which they shared with all the scholars of their day, and many
not bad scholars of our own, of the effect produced on the force of the
article by the relation in which it stands to the other words in the
clause, in point of order. ὁ τίμιος γάμος is "the honourable
marriage;" ὁ τίμιος γάμος ἐστί is "the honourable marriage
is;" ὁ γάμος τίμιος is untranslateable, unless you supply
ἐστί, and then it means "the marriage" (or, marriage in
general, in the abstract) "is honourable." But ἔστω might be
supplied, as it is in Heb. xiii. 4., when it will mean, "let marriage be
honourable:" and τίμιος ὁ γάμος has just the same meaning,
with perhaps this difference, that the emphasis falls more distinctly on
τίμιος. The circumstance that the mere assertion that marriage
is honourable in all (men or things), true as it is in itself, ill
accords with the tenor of the passage of which it forms a part, which is
hortatory, not assertive, is a good reason why CEPHAS'S version should
be preferred. But when we find afterwards the words καὶ ἡ κοίτη
ἀμίαντος, it is impossible to deny this hortatory force to the
sentence; for those words cannot mean "the undefiled bed:" and to
translate them "the (or their) bed is undefiled"--which is the only
version which they will here bear, but one--would give but a feeble
sense. That sole remaining sense is, "the bed (let it) be undefiled;"
subaudite ἔστω in the verse is, "Let marriage be honourable in
all" (men or things), "and the bed be undefiled; but (or for)
whoremongers and adulterers God will judge." Had our translators known
that ἡ κοίτη ἀμίαντος could not mean "the bed undefiled," they
would at once have been driven to see that the verse is a commandment:
and the commandment that marriage should be held honourable in all men
(or in all respects), would have served the purpose of their doctrines
quite as well as the affirmative form which they have given to their
present version. I say, it would have served their purpose; but I say
more: they heeded not what did or would serve their purpose. They looked
only for the truth and disregarded all else in their pursuit of it. With
regard to the controversy about ἐν πᾶσι, it is immaterial which
version be adopted. MR. WALTER is right in the rule which he enunciates,
if he means that in those cases of adjectives in which the masculine and
neuter forms are the same, "man" or "men," not "thing" or "things," must
be understood: but it is not always observed, even in classical writers,
either in Latin or in Greek. There is no reason why it should be broken
here; and I do not believe it is broken. It must have been only by a
slip of CEPHAS'S pen that he called πᾶσι a feminine adjective.
It undoubtedly refers to both sexes. I wish E. A. D. had given the Greek
of the passages from Chrysostom and Augustine, of which he has
communicated the Oxford translation, which is as likely to err, perhaps,
as any other. Jerome's Latin, like the Vulgate, though the words are not
precisely the same, gives a literal version of the Greek, without
supplying any verb at all, either _est_ or _sit_, and, since the Latin
has not that expressive power in cases like this which the article gives
to the Greek, leaves the passage obscure and undecided.

    THEOPHYLACT.


Replies to Minor Queries.

_"Crowns have their Compass," &c._ (Vol. iv., p. 294.).--The lines
alluded to by your correspondent MR. ABSALON form a inscription on a
portrait of King James I. in the Cracherode Collection. (Vide Beloe's
_Anecdotes_, vol. i. p. 210.)

      "Crownes have their compasse, length of dayes their date,
      Triumphes their tombes, felicitie her fate;
      Of more than earth can earth make none partaker,
      But knowledge makes the king most like his Maker."

I am aware that this reference does not go to the "root of the matter,"
if MR. ABSALON wishes to ascertain the author's name; but it may serve
as a clue to further discovery.

    MARGARET GATTY.

  Ecclesfield.

It is quite obvious what lines your correspondent alludes to, though the
above quotation which he gives as the commencement of them is not quite
correct, nor were they written with the object he supposes.

I send a correct copy of them below, taken from Mr. Payne Collier's very
interesting _Life of Shakspeare_, to whom they have always been
attributed; and, it is said, with every show of reason. It is supposed
they were written by him in the shape of a complimentary allusion to
King James I., in grateful acknowledgment of the patronage bestowed by
that monarch upon the stage. The subject is fully discussed at pp. 202,
203. of Mr. Knight's volume, whence, indeed, the above information is
derived; and he publishes the lines, as follows, stating then to be
copied from a coeval manuscript in his possession:--

      "SHAKSPEARE ON THE KING.

      "Crowns have their compass--length of days their date--
      Triumphs their tomb--felicity, her fate--
      Of nought but earth can earth make us partaker,
      But knowledge makes a king most like his Maker."

Some one, to make the allusion more complete, that is, to over-do it,
changed "_a_ king" into "_the_ king" in a subsequent publication of the
lines. But this, as Mr. Payne Collier very justly feels, completely
spoils the whole complexion of the epigram, and perverts a fine allusion
into a raw personality.

    J. J. A.

_The Rev. Richard Farmer_ (Vol. iv., pp. 379.[4] 407.).--The
observations of BOLTON CORNEY upon my incidental mention of Dr. Farmer,
are, I think, wholly unwarranted, both in substance and manner,
especially as he himself furnishes ample confirmation of its truth.

  [Footnote 4: At page 379., second column, fifth line from bottom,
  for "thrice" read "twice."]

Taking his quotations in due order--

1. The certificate of Dr. Farmer's character for learning and ability is
unnecessary, because neither was impugned; nor does an allegation of
atrocity in taste and judgment necessarily imply deficiency in mere
book-learning.

2. As for Isaac Reed's opinion in favour of Farmer's Essay, it might be
met by many of directly opposite tendency, and of at least equal weight.

3. In the only point really in question, BOLTON CORNEY "cannot deny that
Farmer related the anecdote of the _wool-man_" (that being the reputed
trade of Shakspeare's father); but to what end was it related, if not
to suggest an application of which Steevens was only the interpreter?

But BOLTON CORNEY thinks the character of the witness suspicious; he
forgets that only just before he had stated that the anecdote and its
application had been repeated in three editions, extending over thirteen
years, all within the lifetime of Dr. Farmer!

    A. E. B.

  Leeds.

_Earwig_ (Vol. iv., pp. 274. 411.).--The correspondent who asserts the
_curious fact_ that Johnson, Richardson, and Webster do not notice the
word _earwig_ must have consulted some expurgated editions of the works
of those celebrated lexicographers--or else we must consider his
assertion as a _curious fact_ in the history of literary oversights.

    BOLTON CORNEY.




Miscellaneous.


NOTES ON BOOKS, SALES, CATALOGUES, ETC.

Although there are few books which have proved of greater utility to
inquirers into the more recent history of England than Beatson's
_Political Index_, yet it is also true that there are few which have
more frequently or more justly caused the reader to feel the want of a
new and improved edition. A very short examination, however, of Mr.
Haydn's recently published Beatson's _Political Index Modernised, The
Book of Dignities, containing Rolls of the Official Personages of the
British Empire, Civil, Ecclesiastical, Judicial, Military, Naval, and
Municipal, &c._, will satisfy the reader that such want has at length
been supplied in a manner the most ample and the most satisfactory. For
though we have referred to Beatson's well-known work for the purpose of
furnishing a better idea of the _Book of Dignities_, we are bound to
acknowledge that Mr. Haydn is justified in stating, that in the work in
question he owes little more than the plan to Beatson. Mr. Haydn's
volume not only contains many lists (among them the "Administrations of
England, and the Judges of the Ecclesiastical Courts") not to be found
in the _Political Index_, but the author has had the advantage of being
permitted to search the various official records with the view of
enabling him to give complete and accurate information. The result, of
course, is obvious; namely, that just in the same proportion that our
author surpasses Beatson in the extent and accuracy of his various
lists, does the _Book of Dignities_ exceed its predecessor in usefulness
to the official man, the historian, and the scholar.

Mr. Hunt's experience as a public lecturer at the various literary and
scientific institutions of the country, having convinced him that for
the majority of the members of those institutions most of the existing
works on natural philosophy are of too abstruse and technical a
character--are, in short, sealed books,--he has been led to publish a
small volume which we have no doubt will soon become extremely popular.
It is entitled _Elementary Physics, an Introduction to the Study of
Natural Philosophy_; and, as its object is to teach physical science so
far as to render all the great deductions from observation and
experiment satisfactorily clear, without encountering the difficulty of
mathematics,--and no one is better able to do this, and throw a charm
over such a subject, than the author of the _Poetry of Science_,--the
work, which is illustrated with upwards of two hundred woodcuts, will be
found eminently useful; not only to those who have neither time nor
opportunity to carry their studies beyond its pages, but especially as a
"first book" to those in whom it may awaken the desire for a more
perfect knowledge of the beautiful and important truths of which it
treats.

The nature of the _Hand Atlas of Physical Geography, consisting of a
Series of Maps and Illustrations, showing the Geographical Distribution
of Natural Phenomena, embracing the Divisions of Geology, Hydrography,
Meteorology, Natural History: from the Physikalischer Atlas of Berghaus,
and the Maps of the Erdkunde, drawn by and under the immediate
Superintendence of Drs. Ritter and Kiepert, Oetzel, Grimm, &c., by the
Editor of the University Atlas of the Middle Ages_, is sufficiently
described by its ample title-page; which shows, moreover, that the work
is not a mere copy or reduction of the great atlas of Berghaus, on which
it is founded. As a companion to the works of Humboldt, Mrs. Somerville,
and other writers on physical geography, it will be found most useful;
while its convenient size, and moderate price, place it within the reach
of almost all classes of readers.

CATALOGUES RECEIVED.--Nattali and Bond's (23. Bedford Street) Catalogue
Part II. of Ancient and Modern Books; Adam Holden's (60. High Street,
Exeter) Catalogue Part XXXIII. of Second-hand Books in Excellent
Condition; B. Quaritch's (16. Castle Street, Leicester Square) Catalogue
No. 37. of Books in Oriental Literature; J. Russell Smith's (4. Old
Compton Street, Soho) Catalogue Part VII. of an Extensive Collection of
Choice, Useful, and Curious Books.


BOOKS AND ODD VOLUMES

WANTED TO PURCHASE.

HUNTER'S DEANERY OF DONCASTER. Vol. I. Large or small paper.

CLARE'S RURAL MUSE.

CHRISTIAN PIETY FREED FROM THE DELUSIONS OF MODERN ENTHUSIASTS. A.D.
1756 or 1757.

AN ANSWER TO FATHER HUDDLESTONE'S SHORT AND PLAIN WAY TO THE FAITH AND
CHURCH. By Samuel Grascombe. London, 1703. 8vo.

REASONS FOR ABROGATING THE TEST IMPOSED UPON ALL MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT.
By Samuel Parker, Lord Bishop of Oxon. 1688. 4to.

LEWIS'S LIFE OF CAXTON. 8vo. 1737.

CATALOGUE OF JOSEPH AMES'S LIBRARY. 8vo. 1760.

TRAPP'S COMMENTARY. Folio. Vol. I.

WHITLAY'S PARAPHRASE ON THE NEW TESTAMENT. Folio. Vol. I. 1706.

LONG'S ASTRONOMY. 4to. 1742.

MAD. D'ARBLAY'S DIARY. Vol. II 1842.

ADAMS' MORAL TALES.

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF DR. JOHNSON. 1805.

  [Star symbol] Letters, stating particulars and lowest price,
  _carriage free_, to be sent to MR. BELL, Publisher of "NOTES AND
  QUERIES," 186. Fleet Street.


Notices to Correspondents.

J. NORTH _will find his Query respecting the_ Zollverein _answered in
our_ 3rd Vol. p. 451. _His others shall appear shortly._

LOVELACE'S POEMS. D. H. M. C. _is informed that these were reprinted in
1817, under the editorship of our valued correspondent_ MR. SINGER.

J. RAYNER, _who asks for names of present reigning sovereigns, of
presidents of the United States for the last thirty years, and of the
governors-general of India, is referred to Mr. Haydn's_ Book of
Dignities _(noticed in our present number), where he will find all the
information of which he is in search._

W. S. W. _Many thanks for your kind reminder. The article is in type,
although omitted this week from want of room._

J. S. B. _is thanked. Such a list would be most useful._

REPLIES RECEIVED.--_Pope's Honest Factor--Serpent with Human
Head--Marriage of Ecclesiastics--Hobbes's Leviathan--Definition of
Truth--Wearing Gloves before Royalty--Derivation of Earwig--Dictionary
of Hackneyed Quotations--Passage in Campbell--"'Tis Twopence
now"--Cozens the Painter--"Acu tinali meridi"--Nightingale and Thorn,
&c.--Theodolite--Temple of Ægina--Ashen Fagots--Cause of
Transparency--Praed's Charade--Marriages in ruined Churches--Age of
Trees--Joceline's Legacy--St. Bene't Fink--Bristol Tables--"A little
Bird told me"--Lycian Inscriptions--Tuden Aled._

_Copies of our_ Prospectus, _according to the suggestion of_ T. E. H.,
_will be forwarded to any correspondent willing to assist us by
circulating them._

VOLS. I., II., _and_ III., _with very copious Indices, may still be had,
price 9s. 6d. each, neatly bound in cloth._

NOTES AND QUERIES _is published at noon on Friday, so that our country
Subscribers may receive it on Saturday. The subscription for the Stamped
Edition is 10s. 2d. for Six Months, which may be paid by Post-office
Order drawn in favour of our Publisher_, MR. GEORGE BELL, 186 Fleet
Street; _to whose care all communications for the Editor should be
addressed._

_Errata._--Page 345, for "FERMILODUM" read "FERMILODVNI;" p. 394. col.
1. l. 34. for "Danish" read "Dutch;" p. 395. col. 1. l. 19. for
"Dunfe_r_line" read "Dunfermline."




This day are published at the

      UNIVERSITY PRESS, OXFORD,

  THE LIFE OF JAMES DUKE OF ORMOND; containing an account of the
  most remarkable affairs of his time, and particularly of Ireland
  under his government: with an Appendix and a Collection of
  Letters, serving to verify the most material facts in the said
  History. A new Edition, carefully compared with the original MSS.
  6 vols. 8vo. Price 2_l._ 6_s._ in boards.

  NOVUM TESTAMENTUM GRÆCUM. Accedunt parallela S. Scripturæ loca,
  necnon vetus capitulorum notatio et canones Eusebii. 18mo. Price
  3_s._ in boards.

  THE OLD AND NEW TESTAMENT CONNECTED in the History of the Jews and
  Neighbouring Nations, from the declension of the Kingdoms of
  Israel and Judah to the time of Christ. By HUMPHREY PRIDEAUX, Dean
  of Norwich. 2 vols. 8vo. Price 14_s._ in boards.

  FASTI HELLENICI. The Civil and Literary Chronology of Greece and
  Rome, from the CXXIVth Olympiad to the Death of Augustus. By HENRY
  FYNES CLINTON, Esq., M.A. late Student of Christ Church. Second
  Edition, with additions. 4to. Price 1_l._ 12_s._ in boards.

  An EPITOME of the the Civil and Literary Chronology of Greece from
  the earliest Accounts to the Death of Augustus, By HENRY FYNES
  CLINTON, Esq., M.A. late Student of Christ Church. 8vo. Price
  6_s._ 6_d._ in boards.

  ÆSCHYLI Tragoediæ Superstites et Deperditarum Fragmenta ex
  recensione G. DINDORFII. Tomus III. Scholia Græca ex Codicibus
  aucta et emendata. 8vo. Price 8_s._ 6_d._ in boards.

  Sold by JOHN HENRY PARKER, Oxford; and 377. Strand, London: and E.
  GARDNER, 7. Paternoster Row, London.


THE BEST IS THE CHEAPEST.

      The Best Congou Tea             3_s._ 8_d._ per lb.
      The Best Souchong Tea           4_s._ 4_d._   "
      The Best Gunpowder Tea          5_s._ 8_d._   "
      The Best Old Mocha Coffee       1_s._ 4_d._   "
      The Best West India Coffee      1_s._ 4_d._   "
      The Fine True Ripe Rich
          Rare Souchong Tea           4_s._ 0_d._   "

  40_s._ worth or upwards sent CARRIAGE FREE to any part of England by

  PHILLIPS & CO., TEA MERCHANTS,

  No. 8. King William Street, City, London.


Churches of the Middle Ages,

  By HENRY BOWMAN and J. T. CROWTHER, Architects, Manchester.

  No. XVI. published this day.

  CONTENTS.

  S. PETER'S CLAYPOLE, LINCOLNSHIRE,

      Plate 1.--Plan and Elevation of Sedilia in Chancel.
       "    2.--Details of Sedilia, and Plan, Elevation, and
                Details of Locker.

  S. JOHN'S WAPPENBURY, WARWICKSHIRE.

      Plate 2.--East and South Elevations of Chancel.
        "   3.--Details of Chancel.

  S. MARY'S FRAMPTON, LINCOLNSHIRE.

      Plate 1.--Ground Plan.

  S. PETER'S THREEKINGHAM, LINCOLNSHIRE.

      Plate 5.--Longitudinal Section.

  Price 9_s._ plain; 10_s._ 6_d._ tinted; 12_s._ proofs, on large
  paper.

  GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street.


This day is published, price 2_s._ 6_d._,

  A FEW REMARKS

      ON
      A PAMPHLET BY MR. SHILLETO,
      ENTITLED
      "THUCYDIDES OR GROTE?"

  Cambridge: JOHN DEIGHTON; London: GEORGE BELL; Oxford: J. H.
  PARKER.


TEN GUINEAS REWARD.

  RUTHVEN, EARL OF GOWRIE.--PATRICK RUTHVEN, son of William, Earl of
  Gowrie, married between the years 1615 and 1625, as generally
  stated. The above reward will be paid to any person who may find
  the place of marriage, and will produce a Certificate thereof.

  THREE GUINEAS REWARD.

  On the production of a Certificate of the Marriage of SIR ANTHONY
  VAN DYCK with MARIA RUTHVEN, which took place in 1640.

  THREE GUINEAS REWARD.

  For any evidence of the Death or Burial of PATRICK RUTHVEN, son of
  the before-mentioned Patrick, the brother of the said Maria Van
  Dyck, formerly Ruthven. He was living in 1656 (then administrator
  of his father's effects) and was dead probably before 1710.

  Communications upon these points are to be transmitted to "The
  Editor of NOTES AND QUERIES."


December 1.

  THE ART-JOURNAL, for DECEMBER, completes the Third Volume of the
  New Series, for 1851; and contains the Title, Dedication to Prince
  Albert, Table of Contents, &c.

  The Volume of

  THE ART-JOURNAL FOR 1851,

  is this day published, containing Thirty-six Engravings on steel,
  and several hundred Engravings on wood. Price 31_s._ 6_d._

  To be had of all Booksellers in Town and Country.

  THE ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUE OF THE GREAT EXHIBITION.

  (Published in connection with the ART-JOURNAL), may still be
  obtained of any Bookseller, but it will be soon "out of print."

  Active preparations are in progress for introducing several marked
  IMPROVEMENTS in the ART-JOURNAL: these will be evidenced in the
  Part to be issued on the 1st of January, 1852; which, commencing a
  new volume, affords a favourable opportunity for new Subscribers.


Cloth 1_s._, pp. 169, by post 1_s._ 6_d._

  WELSH SKETCHES, chiefly Ecclesiastical, to the Close of the
  Twelfth Century. By the Author of "Proposals for Christian Union."

  "Are written in the same attractive and popular style."--_Notes
  and Queries._

  "Show great research on the part of the Author into the early
  history of the Principality. We can recommend this little work to
  all those who are curious in these matters."--_Carmarthen
  Journal._

  London: JAMES DARLING, Great Queen Street, Lincoln's-inn-fields.


Just published,

  ALMANACKS FOR 1852.

  WHITAKER'S CLERGYMAN'S DIARY, for 1852, will contain a Diary, with
  Table of Lessons, Collects, &c., and full directions for Public
  Worship for every day in the year, with blank spaces for
  Memoranda: A List of all the Bishops and other Dignitaries of the
  Church, arranged under the order of their respective Dioceses;
  Bishops of the Scottish and American Churches; and particulars
  respecting the Roman Catholic and Greek Churches; together with
  Statistics of the various Religious Sects in England; Particulars
  of the Societies connected with the Church; of the Universities,
  &c. Members of both Houses of Convocation, of both Houses of
  Parliament, the Government, Courts of Law, &c. With Instructions
  to Candidates for Holy Orders; and a variety of information useful
  to all Clergymen, price in cloth 3_s._, or 5_s._ as a pocket-book
  with tuck.

  THE FAMILY ALMANACK AND EDUCATIONAL REGISTER for 1852 will
  contain, in addition to the more than usual contents of an
  Almanack for Family Use, a List of the Universities of the United
  Kingdom, with the Heads of Houses, Professors, &c. A List of the
  various Colleges connected with the Church of England, Roman
  Catholics, and various Dissenting bodies. Together with a complete
  List of all the Foundation and Grammar Schools, with an Account of
  the Scholarships and Exhibitions attached to them; to which is
  added an Appendix, containing an Account of the Committee of
  Council on Education, and of the various Training Institutions for
  Teachers; compiled from original sources.

  WHITAKER'S PENNY ALMANACK FOR CHURCHMEN. Containing thirty-six
  pages of Useful Information, including a Table of the Lessons;
  Lists of both Houses of Parliament, &c. &c., stitched in a neat
  wrapper.

  JOHN HENRY PARKER, Oxford and London.


WESTERN LIFE ASSURANCE AND

      ANNUITY SOCIETY,

  3. PARLIAMENT STREET, LONDON.

  Founded A.D. 1812.

  _Directors._

      H. Edgeworth Bicknell, Esq.
      William Cabell, Esq.
      T. Somers Cocks, Jun. Esq. M.P.
      G. Henry Drew, Esq.
      William Evans, Esq.
      William Freeman, Esq.
      F. Fuller, Esq.
      J. Henry Goodhart, Esq.
      T. Grissell, Esq.
      James Hunt, Esq.
      J. Arscott Lethbridge, Esq.
      E. Lucas, Esq.
      James Lys Seager, Esq.
      J. Basley White, Esq.
      Joseph Carter Wood, Esq.

  _Trustees._

      W. Whateley, Esq., Q.C.
      L. C. Humfrey, Esq., Q.C.
      George Drew, Esq.

  _Consulting Counsel._--Sir William P. Wood, M.P.,
  Solicitor-General.

  _Physician._--William Rich. Basham, M.D.

  _Bankers._--Messrs. Cocks, Biddulph, and Co., Charing Cross.

  VALUABLE PRIVILEGE.

  POLICIES effected in this Office do not become void through
  temporary difficulty in paying a Premium, as permission is given
  upon application to suspend the payment at interest, according to
  the conditions detailed in the Prospectus.

  Specimens of Rates of Premium for Assuring 100_l._, with a Share
  in three-fourths of the Profits:--

      Age.  £   _s._ _d._

      17    1    14    4
      22    1    18    8
      27    2     4    5
      32    2    10    8
      37    2    18    6
      42    3     8    2

  ARTHUR SCRATCHLEY, M.A., F.R.A.S., Actuary.

  Now ready, price 10_s._ 6_d._, Second Edition, with material
  additions, INDUSTRIAL INVESTMENT and EMIGRATION; being a TREATISE
  on BENEFIT BUILDING SOCIETIES, and on the General Principles of
  Land Investment, exemplified in the Cases of Freehold Land
  Societies, Building Companies, &c. With a Mathematical Appendix on
  Compound Interest and Life Assurance. By ARTHUR SCRATCHLEY, M.A.,
  Actuary to the Western Life Assurance Society, 3. Parliament
  Street, London.


LONDON LIBRARY, 12. St. James's Square.--Patron--His Royal Highness
Prince ALBERT.

  This Institution now offers to its members a collection of 60,000
  volumes, to which additions are constantly making, both in English
  and foreign literature. A reading room is also open for the use of
  the members, supplied with the best English and foreign
  periodicals.

  Terms of admission--entrance fee, 6_l._; annual subscription,
  2_l._; or entrance fee and life subscription, 26_l._

  By order of the Committee.

  September, 1851.

  J. G. COCHRANE, Secretary and Librarian.


VERY IMPORTANT MANUSCRIPTS.

  PUTTICK AND SIMPSON. Auctioneers of Literary Property, will SELL
  by AUCTION, at their Great Room, 191. Piccadilly, on THURSDAY,
  December 4, a collection of valuable Manuscripts, including many
  important Records of English Counties and Families, Deeds and
  Charters from a very early date, some having interesting and
  curious seals; numerous Original Documents relating to English
  monasteries; large collection of Drawings of Antiquities in
  various English counties, particularly Gloucestershire; most
  interesting MS. relating to London; Libellus Beati Misericordis, a
  legendary MS. of about the year 1350; "The Booke that ys cleped
  the Mirrour of the Blissed Liffe of Jhesu Criste," an English MS.
  of about the year 1449; Churchwardens' Accounts for Berkhampstead,
  1585 to 1746, an important MS.; the unpublished Diary of Walter
  Yonge, 1640 to 1649, 6 vols.; Diary of the Rev. J. Hopkins, A.D.
  1700; Gemistus and Phurnutus, an important Greek MS. of the
  fifteenth century; some interesting Italian Historical MSS., and
  Autograph Letters. Catalogues will be sent on application (if in
  the country, on receipt of two stamps).


In 2 vols. imperial 8vo., price 4_l._ 10_s._ Illustrated by upwards of
2000 Engravings on Wood.

  THE IMPERIAL DICTIONARY, English, Technological, and Scientific;
  adapted to the present State of Literature, Science, and Art, on
  the Basis of "Webster's English Dictionary;" with the Addition of
  many Thousand Words and Phrases from the other Standard
  Dictionaries and Encyclopædias, and from numerous other sources;
  comprising all Words purely English, and the principal and most
  generally used Technical and Scientific Terms, together with their
  Etymologies, and their Pronunciation, according to the best
  authorities.

  CHARACTER OF THE WORK.

  This work is admitted to be superior to any Dictionary hitherto
  offered to the public. See opinions in Prospectus from Rev. James
  Robertson, D.D., Professor of Divinity and Ecclesiastical History,
  University of Edinburgh; Rev. Phillip Killand, M.A., Professor of
  Mathematics, University of Edinburgh; Rev. John Fleming, D.D.,
  Professor of Natural Science, New College, Edinburgh; Rev. Thomas
  Luby, Senior Fellow of Trinity College, Dublin; James Thomson,
  LL.D., Professor of Mathematics, University of Glasgow.

  BLACKIE & SON, Queen Street, Glasgow; South College Street,
  Edinburgh; and Warwick Square, London.


Handsomely bound in cloth, gilt edges, 9_s._; Morocco elegant, 11_s._

  BOOK OF SCOTTISH SONG; a Collection of the Best and most approved
  Songs of Scotland, Ancient and Modern; with Critical and
  Historical Notices regarding them and their Authors, and an Essay
  on Scottish Song. With engraved Frontispiece and Title.

  "The neatest and most comprehensive collection of Scottish
  minstrelsy, ancient and modern."--_Edinburgh Advertiser._

  Handsomely bound in cloth, gilt edges, 9_s._; Morocco elegant,
  11_s._

  BOOK OF SCOTTISH BALLADS; a Comprehensive Collection of the
  Ballads of Scotland, with numerous Illustrative Notes, by the
  Editor of "The Book of Scottish Song." With engraved Frontispiece
  and Title.

  "A rich and valuable collection--accompanied by critical and
  bibliographical illustrations which add largely to the interest of
  the volume."--_John Bull._

  BLACKIE & SON, Queen Street, Glasgow; South College Street,
  Edinburgh; and Warwick Square, London.


Vols. I. and II. now ready.

  Elegantly bound in ultramarine cloth, gilt edges, price 6_s._ each.

  GIRLHOOD OF SHAKSPEARE'S HEROINES. A Series of Fifteen Tales. By
  MARY COWDEN CLARKE. Periodically, in One Shilling Books each
  containing a complete Story.

      Vol. I. Price 6_s._
      Tale I. PORTIA; THE HEIRESS OF BELMONT.
      Tale II. THE THANE'S DAUGHTER.
      Tale III. HELENA; THE PHYSICIAN'S ORPHAN.
      Tale IV. DESDEMONA; THE MAGNIFICO'S CHILD.
      Tale V. MEG AND ALICE; THE MERRY MAIDS OF WINDSOR.

      Vol. II. Price 6_s._
      Tale VI. ISABELLA; THE VOTARESS.
      Tale VII. KATHARINA AND BIANCA; THE SHREW, AND THE DEMURE.
      Tale VIII. OPHELIA; THE ROSE OF ELSINORE.
      Tale IX. ROSALIND AND CELIA; THE FRIENDS.
      Tale X. JULIET; THE WHITE DOVE OF VERONA.

      Vol. III. (In progress.)
      Tale XI. BEATRICE AND HERO; THE COUSINS.
      Tale XII. OLIVIA; THE LADY OF ILLYRIA.

  SMITH & CO., 136. Strand; and SIMPKIN & CO., Stationer's Hall Court.


CHOICE AND USEFUL BOOKS,

  AT

  JAS. NEWMAN'S, 235. HIGH HOLBORN.

  =Ashmole's= Institution, Laws, and Ceremonies of the Order of the
  Garter, fine plates by Hollar, with an Autograph Letter of Ashmole
  inserted, folio, neat. 3_l._ 3_s._ 1672.

  =Anderson's= Royal Genealogies, best edition, folio, neat. 2_l._
  1736.

  =Banks's= Dormant and Extinct Baronage of England, with
  Supplement, 4 vols. 4to. hf. bd. calf. 1_l._ 16_s._ 1807-37.

  ---- Baronia Anglica Concentrata; or, An Account of Baronies in
  Fee, with the Proofs of Parliamentary Sitting from the Reign of
  Edward I., 2 vols. 4to. 1_l._ 1_s._ 1844.

  =Bracton= De Legibus et Consuetudinibus Angliæ, best edition,
  folio, very neat. 2_l._ 2_s._ 1569.

  =Britton's= Cathedral Antiquities of Great Britain, fine plates,
  large paper, 6 vols. royal 4to. hf. bd. uncut. 15_l._ 15_s._
  1814-36.

  ---- Architectural= Antiquities of Great Britain, fine plates,
  large paper, 4 vols. royal 4to. russia extra. 8_l._ 8_s._ 1807-14.

  =Berry's= Encyclopædia of Heraldry, plates, 3 vols. 4to. cf. gt.
  3_l._ 3_s._ 1820.

  =Bibliotheca= Topographica Britannica (Nichols's) a Collection of
  Topographical, Antiquarian, and Biographical Tracts, 8 thick vols.
  4to. boards, very scarce 14_l._ 14_s._ 1780-90.

  =Collectanea= Topographica et Genealogica, 8 vols. royal 8vo.
  5_l._ (Published at 8_l._ 8_s._) 1834-43.

  =Carte's History of the Life of James Duke of Ormonde, 1610-88, 3
  vols. folio, very neat. 3_l._ 15_s._ 1735-6.

  =Chronicles= of England and France, by Froissart and Monstrelet,
  translated by JOHNES, with the Memoirs of Froissart and John Lord
  de Joinville, plates, 9 vols. royal 4to. fine set, russia extra.
  12_l._ 12_s._ 1803-10.

  =Devonshire.=--Oliver's Monasticon Diocesis Exoniensis, fine
  plates, folio, calf extra. 3_l._ 3_s._ 1846.

  =Domesday= Book, with the Introduction and Indexes, also the
  Supplements, 4 vols. folio, new, hf. bd. calf. 7_l._ 10_s._
  1783-1816.

  =Dibdin's= Bibliographical, Antiquarian, and Picturesque Tour in
  France and Germany, fine plates, best edition, 3 vols. royal 8vo.
  russia extra. 6_l._ 10_s._ 1821.

  =Drummond's= Histories of Noble British Families, numerous fine
  Plates, some in colours. 2 vols. royal folio, hf. bd. morocco.
  21_l._ 1846.

  =Dugdale's= History of the Imbanking and Draining of Fens, &c.,
  plates, folio, very neat. 2_l._ 1772.

  =Dumont= et Rousset, Corps Universel Diplomatique du Droit des
  Gens, ou Recueil de Traites de Paix, de Treve, &c. &c. 30 vols.
  large paper, folio, fine copy, calf. 10_l._ 10_s._ 1726-39.

  =Essex.=--Morant's History of the County, plates, best edition, 2
  vols. folio, uncut. 6_l._ 6_s._ 1768.

  =Fenn's= Original Letters of the Paston Family, written during the
  reigns of Henry VI., Edw. IV., &c., 5 vols. 4to. fine copy in
  russia, very scarce. 6_l._ 16_s._ 6_d._ 1787-1823.

  =Fosbrooke's= Encyclopædia of Antiquities, with the Foreign
  Topography, plates, best edition, 3 vols. 4to. calf extra. 2_l._
  15_s._ 1823-8.

  =Fox's= Book of Martyrs, numerous curious cuts, &c. 3 vols. folio
  calf, very neat. 3_l._ 13_s._ 6_d._ 1641.

  =Fuller's= Worthies of England, with the Index, folio, very neat,
  2_l._ 2_s._ 1662.

  =Grimaldi's= Origines Genealogicæ, 4to. calf gilt, scarce, 2_l._
  2_s._ 1828.

  =Gough's= Sepulchral Monuments in Great Britain fine plates, large
  folio. 1786-96.

  ---- British Topography, an Account of what has been done for
  illustrating Topographical Antiquities, 2 vols. 4to. very neat.
  1_l._ 8_s._ 1780.

  =Grose's= Antiquities of England, Wales, Scotland, and Ireland,
  several hundred plates, 12 vols. imperial 8vo. russia. 8_l._ 8_s._
  1784, &c.

  =Guillim's= Heraldry, fine plates, best edition, thick folio,
  neat. 4_l._ 4_s._ 1724.

  =Hertfordshire.=--Chauncy's History of the County, plates,
  including the scarce ones, fine copy, calf. 8_l._ 8_s._ 1700.

  =Hertfordshire.=--Clutterbuck's History of the County, fine
  plates, 3 vols. folio, very clean copy, in boards, 11_l._ 11_s._
  (Published at 18_l._ 18_s._) 1815-27.

  =Lelandi= de Rebus Britannicis Collectanea, cum T. Hearnii,
  plates, 6 vols, 8vo. neat. 2_l._ 16_s._ 1770.

  =Lysons'= Magna Britannia, an Account of the Counties of Beds,
  Berks, Bucks, Cambridge, Cheshire, Cornwall, Cumberland, Derby,
  and Devon, many plates, 6 vols, 4to. hf. bd. neat. 3_l._ 13_s._
  6_d._ 1806-22.

  ---- Account of the Environs of London, with the Supplement,
  plates, best edition, 6 vols. 4to. half russia. 3_l._ 10_s._
  1792-6.

  =London.=--Stow's Survey, many plates, best edition by Strype, 2
  vols. folio, fine copy in russia. 1754.

  ---- Wilkinson's Graphic and Historical Illustrations, 207
  interesting plates, 2 vols. royal 4to. hf. bd. 3_l._ 13_s._ 6_d._
  1819-25.

  =Madox's Firma Burgi, Baronia Anglica, Formulare Anglicanum, and
  History of the Exchequer, large paper. 4 vols. folio, russia, gilt
  edges. 3_l._ 16_s._ 1727. &c.

  =Manuscripts in the British Museum.--Catalogues of the Cottonian,
  Harleian, and Lansdowne Collections, 6 vols. folio. 5_l._ 10_s._
  1802-19.

  =Montfaucon= (B. De), Les Monumens de la Monarchie Française,
  numerous fine plates, 5 vols. folio, neat in calf, scarce. 8_l._
  18_s._ 6_d._ Paris, 1729-33.

  =Meyrick's= Ancient Armour, last edition, much enlarged, fine
  coloured engravings, 3 vols. folio, hf. bd. morocco. 8_l._ 18_s._
  6_d._ 1844.

  =Murphy's= Arabian Antiquities of Spain, 100 fine engravings,
  large folio, hf. bd. morocco, 7_l._ 7_s._

  =Neale's= Views of Seats, nearly 900 fine plates, proofs on India
  paper, with descriptions, large paper, 11 vols. 4to. 12_l._
  (Published at 55 guineas.) 1822-9.

  =Nichols's= Progresses and Processions of Queen Elizabeth, also of
  King James I., plates, 7 vols. 4to. fine copy, new in calf. 9_l._
  1823-8.

  =Norfolk.=--Blomefield and Parkin's History of the County, plates,
  large paper, 11 vols. 4to. fine copy, calf. 9_l._ 1805-10.

  ---- and Suffolk.--Cotman's Engravings of the Sepulchral Brasses
  in those Counties, original edition, folio, hf. bd. 2_l._ 15_s._
  1819.

  ---- another new edition enlarged, 2 vols. folio, hf. bd. morocco.
  4_l._ 14_s._ 6_d._ (Published at 8_l._ 8_s._) 1838.

  ---- Cotman's Architectural Antiquities of the County, 240 fine
  plates, with Descriptions by Rickman, 2 vols. large folio, hf. bd.
  morocco. 7_l._ 7_s._ 1838.

  =Nottinghamshire.=--Thoroton's History of the County, with
  additions by Thoresby, plates, 3 vols. 4to. very neat. 2_l_ 15_s._
  1797.

  =Oxfordshire.=--Plat's History of the County, best edition, folio,
  fine copy, calf. 1_l._ 10_s._ 1705.

  ---- Skelton's Antiquities of the County, fine plates, royal 4to.
  calf extra. 2_l._ 8_s._

  ---- The same, with the Oxonia Antiqua Restaurata, the Colleges,
  Halls, &c. and the Record of Oxford Founders, 4 vols. royal 4to.
  cloth. 6_l._ 10_s._ (Published at 24_l._) 1823-8.

  =Painter's= Palace of Pleasure, a series of Tales which appeared
  during the reign of Elizabeth, edited by Haslewood, 2 vols. 4to.
  hf. russia, uncut. 2_l._ 15_s._ 1813.

  =Picart's= Ceremonies and Religious Customs of various Nations,
  fine plates, large paper, 7 vols. large folio, hf. bd. 5_l._ 1733.

  =Rolls= (The) of Parliament, comprising the Petitions, Pleas, &c.,
  from Edward I. to Henry VII., with Index, 7 vols. folio, hf. bd.
  neat. 2_l._ 15_s._

  =Sandford's= Genealogical History of the Kings and Queens of
  England, best edition, by Stebbing, plates, fine copy. 6_l._
  10_s._ 1707.

  =Somersetshire.=--Collinson's History of the County, plates, with
  some scarce additional ones inserted, 3 vols. royal 4to. hf. bd.
  uncut. 4_l._ 4_s._ 1791.




Printed by THOMAS CLARK SHAW, of No. 8. New Street Square, at No. 5 New
Street Square, in the Parish of St. Bride, in the City of London; and
published by GEORGE BELL, of No. 186. Fleet Street, in the Parish of St.
Dunstan in the West, in the City of London, Publisher, at No. 186. Fleet
Street aforesaid.--Saturday, November 29, 1851.




      [List of volumes and pages in "Notes and Queries", Vol. I-IV]

      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. I.                                   |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol., No.     | Date, Year        | Pages     | PG # xxxxx  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No.  1 | November  3, 1849 |   1 -  17 | PG #  8603  |
      | Vol. I No.  2 | November 10, 1849 |  18 -  32 | PG # 11265  |
      | Vol. I No.  3 | November 17, 1849 |  33 -  46 | PG # 11577  |
      | Vol. I No.  4 | November 24, 1849 |  49 -  63 | PG # 13513  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No.  5 | December  1, 1849 |  65 -  80 | PG # 11636  |
      | Vol. I No.  6 | December  8, 1849 |  81 -  95 | PG # 13550  |
      | Vol. I No.  7 | December 15, 1849 |  97 - 112 | PG # 11651  |
      | Vol. I No.  8 | December 22, 1849 | 113 - 128 | PG # 11652  |
      | Vol. I No.  9 | December 29, 1849 | 130 - 144 | PG # 13521  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 10 | January   5, 1850 | 145 - 160 | PG #        |
      | Vol. I No. 11 | January  12, 1850 | 161 - 176 | PG # 11653  |
      | Vol. I No. 12 | January  19, 1850 | 177 - 192 | PG # 11575  |
      | Vol. I No. 13 | January  26, 1850 | 193 - 208 | PG # 11707  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 14 | February  2, 1850 | 209 - 224 | PG # 13558  |
      | Vol. I No. 15 | February  9, 1850 | 225 - 238 | PG # 11929  |
      | Vol. I No. 16 | February 16, 1850 | 241 - 256 | PG # 16193  |
      | Vol. I No. 17 | February 23, 1850 | 257 - 271 | PG # 12018  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 18 | March     2, 1850 | 273 - 288 | PG # 13544  |
      | Vol. I No. 19 | March     9, 1850 | 289 - 309 | PG # 13638  |
      | Vol. I No. 20 | March    16, 1850 | 313 - 328 | PG # 16409  |
      | Vol. I No. 21 | March    23, 1850 | 329 - 343 | PG # 11958  |
      | Vol. I No. 22 | March    30, 1850 | 345 - 359 | PG # 12198  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 23 | April     6, 1850 | 361 - 376 | PG # 12505  |
      | Vol. I No. 24 | April    13, 1850 | 377 - 392 | PG # 13925  |
      | Vol. I No. 25 | April    20, 1850 | 393 - 408 | PG # 13747  |
      | Vol. I No. 26 | April    27, 1850 | 409 - 423 | PG # 13822  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 27 | May       4, 1850 | 425 - 447 | PG # 13712  |
      | Vol. I No. 28 | May      11, 1850 | 449 - 463 | PG # 13684  |
      | Vol. I No. 29 | May      18, 1850 | 465 - 479 | PG # 15197  |
      | Vol. I No. 30 | May      25, 1850 | 481 - 495 | PG # 13713  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. II.                                  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol., No.      | Date, Year         | Pages   | PG # xxxxx  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 31 | June  1, 1850      |   1- 15 | PG # 12589  |
      | Vol. II No. 32 | June  8, 1850      |  17- 32 | PG # 15996  |
      | Vol. II No. 33 | June 15, 1850      |  33- 48 | PG # 26121  |
      | Vol. II No. 34 | June 22, 1850      |  49- 64 | PG # 22127  |
      | Vol. II No. 35 | June 29, 1850      |  65- 79 | PG # 22126  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 36 | July  6, 1850      |  81- 96 | PG # 13361  |
      | Vol. II No. 37 | July 13, 1850      |  97-112 | PG # 13729  |
      | Vol. II No. 38 | July 20, 1850      | 113-128 | PG # 13362  |
      | Vol. II No. 39 | July 27, 1850      | 129-143 | PG # 13736  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 40 | August  3, 1850    | 145-159 | PG # 13389  |
      | Vol. II No. 41 | August 10, 1850    | 161-176 | PG # 13393  |
      | Vol. II No. 42 | August 17, 1850    | 177-191 | PG # 13411  |
      | Vol. II No. 43 | August 24, 1850    | 193-207 | PG # 13406  |
      | Vol. II No. 44 | August 31, 1850    | 209-223 | PG # 13426  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 45 | September  7, 1850 | 225-240 | PG # 13427  |
      | Vol. II No. 46 | September 14, 1850 | 241-256 | PG # 13462  |
      | Vol. II No. 47 | September 21, 1850 | 257-272 | PG # 13936  |
      | Vol. II No. 48 | September 28, 1850 | 273-288 | PG # 13463  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 49 | October  5, 1850   | 289-304 | PG # 13480  |
      | Vol. II No. 50 | October 12, 1850   | 305-320 | PG # 13551  |
      | Vol. II No. 51 | October 19, 1850   | 321-351 | PG # 15232  |
      | Vol. II No. 52 | October 26, 1850   | 353-367 | PG # 22624  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 53 | November  2, 1850  | 369-383 | PG # 13540  |
      | Vol. II No. 54 | November  9, 1850  | 385-399 | PG # 22138  |
      | Vol. II No. 55 | November 16, 1850  | 401-415 | PG # 15216  |
      | Vol. II No. 56 | November 23, 1850  | 417-431 | PG # 15354  |
      | Vol. II No. 57 | November 30, 1850  | 433-454 | PG # 15405  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 58 | December  7, 1850  | 457-470 | PG # 21503  |
      | Vol. II No. 59 | December 14, 1850  | 473-486 | PG # 15427  |
      | Vol. II No. 60 | December 21, 1850  | 489-502 | PG # 24803  |
      | Vol. II No. 61 | December 28, 1850  | 505-524 | PG # 16404  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. III.                                 |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol., No.       | Date, Year        | Pages   | PG # xxxxx  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 62 | January  4, 1851  |   1- 15 | PG # 15638  |
      | Vol. III No. 63 | January 11, 1851  |  17- 31 | PG # 15639  |
      | Vol. III No. 64 | January 18, 1851  |  33- 47 | PG # 15640  |
      | Vol. III No. 65 | January 25, 1851  |  49- 78 | PG # 15641  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 66 | February  1, 1851 |  81- 95 | PG # 22339  |
      | Vol. III No. 67 | February  8, 1851 |  97-111 | PG # 22625  |
      | Vol. III No. 68 | February 15, 1851 | 113-127 | PG # 22639  |
      | Vol. III No. 69 | February 22, 1851 | 129-159 | PG # 23027  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 70 | March  1, 1851    | 161-174 | PG # 23204  |
      | Vol. III No. 71 | March  8, 1851    | 177-200 | PG # 23205  |
      | Vol. III No. 72 | March 15, 1851    | 201-215 | PG # 23212  |
      | Vol. III No. 73 | March 22, 1851    | 217-231 | PG # 23225  |
      | Vol. III No. 74 | March 29, 1851    | 233-255 | PG # 23282  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 75 | April  5, 1851    | 257-271 | PG # 23402  |
      | Vol. III No. 76 | April 12, 1851    | 273-294 | PG # 26896  |
      | Vol. III No. 77 | April 19, 1851    | 297-311 | PG # 26897  |
      | Vol. III No. 78 | April 26, 1851    | 313-342 | PG # 26898  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 79 | May  3, 1851      | 345-359 | PG # 26899  |
      | Vol. III No. 80 | May 10, 1851      | 361-382 | PG # 32495  |
      | Vol. III No. 81 | May 17, 1851      | 385-399 | PG # 29318  |
      | Vol. III No. 82 | May 24, 1851      | 401-415 | PG # 28311  |
      | Vol. III No. 83 | May 31, 1851      | 417-440 | PG # 36835  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 84 | June  7, 1851     | 441-472 | PG # 37379  |
      | Vol. III No. 85 | June 14, 1851     | 473-488 | PG # 37403  |
      | Vol. III No. 86 | June 21, 1851     | 489-511 | PG # 37496  |
      | Vol. III No. 87 | June 28, 1851     | 513-528 | PG # 37516  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. IV.                                  |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol., No.       | Date, Year         | Pages   | PG # xxxxx |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No. 88  | July  5, 1851      |   1- 15 | PG # 37548 |
      | Vol. IV No. 89  | July 12, 1851      |  17- 31 | PG # 37568 |
      | Vol. IV No. 90  | July 19, 1851      |  33- 47 | PG # 37593 |
      | Vol. IV No. 91  | July 26, 1851      |  49- 79 | PG # 37778 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No. 92  | August  2, 1851    |  81- 94 | PG # 38324 |
      | Vol. IV No. 93  | August  9, 1851    |  97-112 | PG # 38337 |
      | Vol. IV No. 94  | August 16, 1851    | 113-127 | PG # 38350 |
      | Vol. IV No. 95  | August 23, 1851    | 129-144 | PG # 38386 |
      | Vol. IV No. 96  | August 30, 1851    | 145-167 | PG # 38405 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No.  97 | Sept.  6, 1851     | 169-183 | PG # 38433 |
      | Vol. IV No.  98 | Sept. 13, 1851     | 185-200 | PG # 38491 |
      | Vol. IV No.  99 | Sept. 20, 1851     | 201-216 | PG # 38574 |
      | Vol. IV No. 100 | Sept. 27, 1851     | 217-246 | PG # 38656 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No. 101 | Oct.  4, 1851      | 249-264 | PG # 38701 |
      | Vol. IV No. 102 | Oct. 11, 1851      | 265-287 | PG # 38773 |
      | Vol. IV No. 103 | Oct. 18, 1851      | 289-303 | PG # 38864 |
      | Vol. IV No. 104 | Oct. 25, 1851      | 305-333 | PG # 38926 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No. 105 | Nov.  1, 1851      | 337-358 | PG # 39076 |
      | Vol. IV No. 106 | Nov.  8, 1851      | 361-374 | PG # 39091 |
      | Vol. IV No. 107 | Nov. 15, 1851      | 377-396 | PG # 39135 |
      | Vol. IV No. 108 | Nov. 22, 1851      | 401-414 | PG # 39197 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol I. Index. [Nov. 1849-May 1850]             | PG # 13536 |
      | INDEX TO THE SECOND VOLUME. MAY-DEC., 1850     | PG # 13571 |
      | INDEX TO THE THIRD VOLUME. JAN.-JUNE, 1851     | PG # 26770 |
      +------------------------------------------------+------------+






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes and Queries, Vol. IV, Number
109, November 29, 1851, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES AND QUERIES, NOV 29, 1851 ***

***** This file should be named 39233-0.txt or 39233-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/2/3/39233/

Produced by Charlene Taylor, Jonathan Ingram and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Library of Early Journals.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
