The Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes and Queries, Vol. IV, Number 113,
December 27, 1851, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Notes and Queries, Vol. IV, Number 113, December 27, 1851
       A Medium of Inter-communication for Literary Men, Artists,
       Antiquaries, Genealogists, etc.

Author: Various

Editor: George Bell

Release Date: April 21, 2012 [EBook #39503]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES AND QUERIES, DEC 27, 1851 ***




Produced by Charlene Taylor, Jonathan Ingram and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Library of Early Journals.)





[Transcriber's note: Original spelling variations have not been
standardized. Characters with macrons have been marked in brackets with
an =equal= sign, as [=e] for a letter e with a macron on top.
_Underscores_ have been used to mark _italic_ fonts; emphasis by =letter
spacing= or =bold= text have been marked with =equal= signs. A list of
volumes and pages in "Notes and Queries" has been added at the end.]




NOTES AND QUERIES:

A MEDIUM FOR INTER-COMMUNICATION

FOR

LITERARY MEN, ARTISTS, ANTIQUARIES, GENEALOGISTS, ETC.

"When found, make a note of."--CAPTAIN CUTTLE.

VOL. IV.--No. 113. SATURDAY, DECEMBER 27. 1851.

Price Threepence. Stamped Edition 4_d._




CONTENTS.

                                                                Page


      NOTES:--

      Historical Coincidences: Barclay and Perkins               497

      Remains of King James II.                                  498

      Shetland Folk Lore:--The Wresting
      Thread--Ringworm--Burn--Elfshot                            500

      Minor Notes:--Names of Places in Normandy and Orkney       501

      QUERIES:--

      Minor Queries:--Meaning of Ploydes--Green-eyed
      Monster--Perpetual Lamp--Family of Butts--Greek
      Names of Fishes--Drimmnitavichillichatan--Chalk-back
      Day--Moravian Hymns--Rural and Urban Deans--Ducks
      and Drakes--Vincent Kidder--House at Welling--Shropshire,
      Price of Land--Legal Time                                  501

      MINOR QUERIES ANSWERED:--Thorns of Dauphine--Inscription
      at Lyons--Turnpikes                                        502

      REPLIES:--

      General James Wolfe                                        503

      "Flemish Account"                                          504

      Pope and Flatman, by Henry H. Breen                        505

      Derivation of "London," by Francis Crossley, &c.           505

      Replies to Minor Queries:--Legend of the Robin
      Redbreast--Monk and Cromwell--Souling--Clekit House--Peter
      Talbot--Races in which Children, &c.--Bacon a Poet--Story
      referred to by Jeremy Taylor--Share of Presbyters in
      Ordination--Weever's Funeral Monument--Dial Motto
      at Karlsbad--Cabal--Rectitudines Singularum
      Personarum--Stanzas in Childe Harold--The Island
      and Temple of Ægina--Herschel anticipated--Wyle
      Cop--Macfarlane Manuscripts                                506

      MISCELLANEOUS:--

      Notes on Books, Sales, Catalogues, &c.                     509

      Books and Odd Volumes wanted                               510

      Notices to Correspondents                                  510

      Advertisements                                             510




Notes.


HISTORICAL COINCIDENCES.

_Barclay and Perkins._

Have you ever amused yourself by tracing historical parallels? did you
ever note how often one age reflects the character of another, so that
the stage of real life seems to us at intervals as a theatre on which we
see represented the passions of the past, its political tendencies, and
monied speculations; the only change being that of costume, and a wider
but more modified method of action? So true it is that men change,
institutions vary, and that human nature is always the same. The church
reproduces its Laud, the railway exchange its Law, the bench has its
Mansfield, the Horse Guards its greater Marlborough, and Newgate its
Mrs. Brownrigg. We have giants as great as King Charles's porter, and a
Tom Thumb who would have frightened the very _ghosts_ of all departed
Jeffery Hudsons,--a class not generally accused of fear, except at
daybreak,--by his unequalled _diminutiveness_. Take the great questions
which agitate the church and the senate-house, which agitated them in
the sixteenth, during much of the two following centuries, and you will
find the same theological, political, commercial, and sanitary questions
debated with equal honesty, equal truth, and similar prospects of
satisfactory solution. I confess, however, that for one historical
coincidence I was unprepared; and that "Barclay and Perkins," in the
case of assault upon a noted public character, should have an historical
antecedent in the seventeenth century, has caused me some surprise. It
is not necessary for me to recall to your attention how Barclay and
Perkins were noised about on the occasion of the attack on General
Haynau. The name of the firm was as familiar to our lips as their
porter:

      "Never came reformation in a flood
      With such a _heady_ currance."

There had been no similar _émeute_, as I was told by a civic wit, since
the days of "Vat Tyler." Now let me remind you of the Barclay and
Perkins and the other Turnham Green men's plot, who conspired to assault
and assassinate King William III. Mind, the coincidence is only in name.
The historic parallel is rather of kind than event, but it is not the
less remarkable when we consider the excitement twice connected with
these names. The character of James II. may be described as the
_villainy of weakness_. It possessed nothing of elevation, breadth, or
strength. It was this weak obliquity which made him deceive his people,
and led them to subvert the laws, supplant the church, and to become a
tyrant in the name of religious liberty. His means to recover the throne
were as mean as the manner of its desertion was despicable. He tried
cajolery, it failed; the bravery of his Irish soldiers, it was
unavailing. He next relied on the corruption of Russell, the avarice of
Marlborough; but as these men were to be bought as well as sold, he put
his trust finally in any villain who was willing to be hired for
assassination. In 1692 M. de Grandval, a captain of dragoons, was shot
in the allied camp, who confessed that King James at St. Germain, in
the presence of the queen, had engaged him to shoot King William. Four
years later James had contrived another plot. At the head of this were
Sir George Barclay and Sir William Perkins, and under their guidance
twenty men were engaged to assist in the assassination of King William.
The plan was as follows. It was the custom of the king to hunt near the
house of Mr. Latten, in the neighbourhood of Brentford, and they
designed to surprise the king on his return at a hollow part of the road
between Brentford and Turnham Green, one division of them being placed
behind some bushes and brushwood at the western end of the Green. Some
of your correspondents may perhaps fix the spot; but as the Green
extended then far beyond what it now does, I suspect it was about the
road leading to Gunnesbury; the road itself I recollect as a boy seeing
much elevated and improved. The design failed, two of the gang betrayed
the rest,--Barclay escaped, but Perkins and some others were hung.
Jeremy Collier attended them on the scaffold, and publicly gave them
absolution in the name of Christ, and by imposition of hands, for all
their sins. I need not describe to you the excitement caused by this
plot of Barclay and Perkins: the event connected with their names, as at
our later period--

        "Was a theme of all conversation;
      Had it been a pillar of church and state,
      Or a prop to support the whole dead weight,
      It could not have furnished more debate
        For the heads and tails of the nation."

James closed the drama becomingly; he published a defence of his conduct
in a paper, the style of which has been well described as the "euphemism
of assassination." The road between Turnham Green and Kew was long after
associated with the names of "Barclay and Perkins."

    S.H.


REMAINS OF KING JAMES II.

The enclosed copy of an authentic document, obtained through the
kindness of Mr. Pickford, Her Majesty's consul in Paris, is communicated
to the publisher of "NOTES AND QUERIES", in the belief that it may prove
acceptable to those who take an interest in the questions raised by the
articles in Nos. 46. 48. and 56. of that valuable publication.

This document is an "Extract from the Register of the Deliberation of
the Municipal Council of St. Germain-en-Laye," dated July 12, 1824,
containing the official report, or _procès-verbal_, of the discovery
made that day of three boxes, in which were deposited a portion of the
remains of King James II. and of the Princess Louise-Marie, his
daughter.

The "annexes" referred to, of the respective dates of September 16 and
17, A.D. 1701, leave no doubt as to the disposal of the royal corpse at
that time. With respect to its fate, after its removal from the English
Benedictine convent in Paris in 1793, as mentioned in the article No.
46., it is most probable that it shared the fate of other royal relics
exhumed at the same disastrous period from the vaults of St. Denys,
which were scattered to the winds, or cast into a common pit.

It may be presumed that the epitaph given in the same document, and
mentioned as being _such as it had existed_ in the church of St.
Germain-en-Laye, had disappeared before the date of the "Extract from
the Register." It probably was destroyed during the first fury of the
French Revolution in 1793:--

  "République Française.

  "Liberté, Egalité, Fraternité.

  "Ville de Saint Germain-en-Laye.

  "Extrait du Régistre des Déliberations du Conseil Municipal.

  "Séance du 12 Juillet, 1824.

  "Aujourd'hui lundi douze Juillet mil huit cent vingt-quatre, trois
  heures de relevée, nous Pierre Danès de Montardat, ancien Colonel
  de Cavalerie, chevalier de l'ordre royal et militaire de St.
  Louis, Maire de la ville de St. Germain-en-Laye, ayant été informé
  par MM. les Architectes de la nouvelle église de cette ville, que
  ce matin, vers sept heures, en faisant la fouille de l'emplacement
  du nouveau clocher dans l'ancienne chapelle des fonds, on avait
  découvert successivement trois boites en plomb de différentes
  formes, placées très près les unes des autres, et dont l'une
  desquelles portait une inscription gravée sur une table d'étain,
  constatant qu'elle contient partie des restes du roi Jacques
  Stuart Second, Roi d'Angleterre, d'Ecosse et d'Irlande. Nous
  sommes transporté sur le lieu susdésigné accompagné de M. le
  Compte Bozon de Talleyrand, Lieutenant Général honoraire, Grand'
  Croix de l'ordre de St. Louis, Gouverneur du Château de St.
  Germain-en-Laye, de M. Jean Jacques Collignon, curé de cette
  paroisse royale, de MM. Malpièce et Moutier, architectes de la
  nouvelle église, de M. Rigault, secrétaire de la Mairie, et de MM.
  Voisin, Perrin, Baudin, de Beaurepaire (le comte), Dusouchet,
  Galot, Decan, Dupuis, Jeulin, Journet, Griveau, Dufour, Delaval,
  Casse et Barbé, membres du Conseil Municipal, et de M. Morin,
  Commissaire de Police,

  "Où étant, nous avons reconnu et constaté;

  "1'o. Que la première des trois boites susdites (figure A) était
  en plomb de 0m. 35c. carrés et 0m. 18 centimêtres de hauteur,
  recouverte d'une plaque en même de 0m. 22 centimêtres carrés,
  sous laquelle plaque on a trouvé une table en étain de 0m. 20
  centimêtres de haut, 0m. 15c. de large, portant cette
  inscription:--

      "'Ici est une portion de la chair et des parties
      nobles du corps de très haut, très puissant,
      très excellent Prince Jacques Stuart, second du
      nom, Roi de la Grande Brétagne; naquit le
      XXIII Octobre MDCXXXIII, décédé en
      France, à St. Germain-en-Laye, le XVI Septembre
      MDCCI.'

  "Au bas de la plaque sont empreintes ses armes.

  "Cette boite est en partie mutilée: elle contient plusieurs
  portions d'ossements et des restes non encore consommés.

  "La deuxième boite (figure B) circulaire est aussi en plomb de
  0m. 34 centimêtres de diamétre et 0m. 30c. de hauteur et
  découverte.

  "La troisième boite (figure C) de 0m. 30c. carrés et 0m. 25
  centimêtres de hauteur est aussi en plomb et fermée de toutes
  parts à l'exception d'un trou oxydé.

  "Ces deux dernières boites ne paraissent contenir que des restes
  consommés. Ces trois boites ont été enlevées, en présence de
  toutes les personnes dénommées au présent, avec le plus grand soin
  et transportées dans le Trésor de la Sacristie.

  "Ensuite nous avons fait faire aux archives de la Mairie les
  recherches nécessaires, et nous avons trouvé sur le régistre de
  l'année 1701 à la date du 16 Septembre, les actes dont copies
  seront jointes au présent procès-verbal, ainsi que l'Epitaphe du
  Roi Jacques, et qui constatent que partie de ses entrailles, de
  son cerveau avec les poumons et un peu de sa chair, sont restés en
  dépôt dans cette église pour la consolation des peuples tant
  Français qu'Anglais, et pour conserver en ce lieu la mémoire d'un
  si grand et si réligieux prince.

  "Les autres boites sont sans doute les restes de la Princesse
  Louise Marie d'Angleterre et fille du Roi Jacques Second, décédée
  à St. Germain le 17 Avril, 1712, ainsi que le constate le régistre
  de cette année, qui indique qu'une partie des entrailles de cette
  Princesse a été déposée près des restes de son père.

  "De tout ce que dessus le présent a été rédigé les sus-dits jour,
  mois et an, et signé de toutes les personnes y dénommées.

  "(Ainsi signé à la minute du procès-verbal.)

      "Suivent les annexes.

  "Du seize Septembre mil sept cent un, à trois heures et vingt
  minutes après midi, est décédé dans le château vieil de ce lieu,
  très haut, très puissant et très réligieux Prince Jacques Stuart,
  second du nom, Roi d'Angleterre, d'Ecosse et d'Irlande, âgé de 67
  ans 11 mois, également regretté des peuples de France et
  d'Angleterre, et surtout des habitans de ce lieu et autres qui
  avaient été temoins oculaires de ses excellentes vertus et de sa
  réligion, pour laquelle il avait quitté toutes ses couronnes, les
  cédant à un usurpateur dénaturé, ayant mieux aimé vivre en bon
  chrétien éloigné de ses états, et faire par ses infortunes et sa
  patience, triompher la réligion catholique, que de régner lui-même
  au milieu d'un peuple mutin et hérétique. Sa dernière maladie
  avait duré quinze jours, pendant lesquels il avait reçu deux fois
  le St. Viatique et l'extrême onction par les mains de Messire Jean
  François de Benoist, Docteur de la Maison de Sorbonne, prieur et
  curé de ce lieu, son propre pasteur, avec des sentimens d'une
  humilité profonde, qu'après avoir pardonné à tous les siens
  rebelles et ses plus cruels ennemis, il demanda même pardon à ses
  officiers, s'il leur avait donné quelque sujet de chagrin. Il
  avait donné aussi des marques de sa tendresse et réligion au
  Sérénissime Prince de Galles, son fils, digne héritier de ses
  couronnes aussi bien que de ses vertus, auquel il recommanda de
  n'avoir jamais d'autre règle de sa conduite que les maximes de
  l'Evangile, d'honorer toujours sa très vertueuse mère, aux soins
  de laquelle il le laissait, de se souvenir des bontés que Sa
  Majesté très chrétienne lui avait toujours témoigné, et de plutôt
  renoncer à tous ses états que d'abandonner la foi de Jésus-Christ.
  Tout le peuple tant de ce lieu que des environs ont eu la
  consolation de lui rendre les derniers devoirs et de la visiter
  pour la dernière fois en son lit de parade, où il demeura
  vingt-quatre heures exposé en vue, pendant lesquelles il fut
  assisté du clergé de cette église, des révérends pères Récollets
  et des Loges, qui ne cesseront pas de prier pour le repos de l'âme
  de cet illustre héros du nom chrétien que le Seigneur récompense
  d'une couronne éternelle.

    "Signé, P. PARMENTIER, Secrétaire."

  "Du dix-septième jour (même année) sur les huit heures et demie du
  soir, fut enlevé du château vieil de ce lieu, le corps de très
  haut, très puissant et réligieux monarque Jacques Stuart, second
  du nom, Roi d'Angleterre, d'Ecosse et d'Irlande, après avoir été
  embaumé en la manière accoutumée, pour être conduit aux Réligieux
  Bénédictins Anglais de Paris, faubourg St. Jacques, accompagné
  seulement de soixante gardes et trois carosses à la suite, ainsi
  qu'il avait ordonné pour donner encore après sa mort un exemple de
  détachement qu'il avait eu pendant sa vie des vanités du monde,
  n'étant assisté que de ses aumoniers et de Messire Jean François
  de Benoist, prêtre, Docteur de la Maison de Sorbonne, prieur et
  curé de ce lieu, son propre pasteur, qui ne l'avait point
  abandonné dans toute sa maladie, l'ayant consolé dans tous ses
  maux d'une manière édifiante et autant pleine d'onction qu'on
  puisse désirer du pasteur zélé pour le salut de ses ouailles. Son
  coeur fut en même tems porté dans l'Eglise des Réligieuses de
  Chaillot; une partie de ses entrailles, de son cerveau, avec ses
  poumons et un peu de sa chair, sont restés en dépôt dans cette
  église, pour la consolation des peuples tant Français qu'Anglais
  et pour conserver en ce lieu la mémoire d'un si grand et si
  réligieux prince.

    "Signé, P. PARMENTIER, Secrétaire."

  "Epitaphe de Jacques Second, Roi de la Grande Brétagne, telle
  qu'elle existait dans l'Eglise de St. Germain-en-Laye:--

                   "'A. Regi Regum
                  felicique memoriæ
           Jacobi II. Majoris Britanniæ Regis
            Qui sua hic viscera condi voluit
          Conditus ipse in visceribus Christi.
          Fortitudine bellicâ nulli secundus,
             Fide Christianâ cui non par?
             Per alteram quid non ausus?
           Propter alteram quid non passus?
                 Illâ plus quam heros
                  Istâ propè martyr.

                      Fide fortis
         Accensus periculis, erectus adversis.

            Nemo Rex magìs, cui regna quatuor
         Anglia, Scotia, Hibernia--Ubi quartum?
                       Ipse sibi.
                   Tria eripi potuere
                Quartum intactum mansit.
       Priorum defensio, Exercitus qui defecerunt
      Postremi tutelæ, virtutes nunquam transfugæ.

             Quin nec illa tria erepta omnino.
           Instar Regnorum est Ludovicus hospes
      Sarcit amicitia talis tantæ sacrilegia perfidiæ,
             Imperat adhuc qui sic exulat.

            Moritur, ut vixit, fide plenus
            Eòque advolat quò fides ducit
             Ubi nihil perfidia potest.

        Non fletibus hic, canticis locus est.
           Aut si flendum, flenda Anglia.'

  "Pour copies conformes, Le Maire de St. Germain," &c.

The authenticity of the signature attested by Her Britannic Majesty's
consul in Paris, Dec. 11, 1850.


SHETLAND FOLK LORE.

_The Wresting Thread._--When a person has received a sprain, it is
customary to apply to an individual practised in casting the "wrested
thread." This is thread spun from black wool, on which are cast _nine_
knots, and tied round a sprained leg or arm. During the time the
operator is putting the thread round the affected limb, he says, in a
muttering tone, in such a manner as not to be understood by the
bystanders, nor even by the person operated upon--

      "The Lord rade (rode),
      And the foal slade (slipped);
      He lighted,
      An she righted.
      Set joint to joint[1],
      Bone to bone,
      And sinew to sinew,
      Heal in the Holy Ghost's name!!!"

  [Footnote 1: This charm is remarkable for its resemblance to an
  early German one found by Grimm in a MS. of the tenth century,
  originally published by him in 1842, and to be found, with
  references to Norwegian, Swedish, Flemish, and this Scottish
  version, in the second edition of his _Deutsche Mythologie_, s.
  1181-2.--ED.]

_Ringworm._--The person affected with ringworm takes a little ashes
between the forefinger and thumb, three successive mornings, and before
taking any food, and holding the ashes to the part affected, says--

      "Ringworm! ringworm red!
      Never mayst thou spread or speed,
      But aye grow less and less,
      And die away among the ase (ashes)."

_Burn._--To cure a burn, the following words are used:--

      "Here come I to cure a burnt sore;
      If the dead knew what the living endure,
      The burnt sore would burn no more."

The operator, after having repeated the above, blows his breath three
times upon the burnt place.

_Elfshot._--A notion is prevalent, that when a cow is suddenly taken
ill, she is elfshot; that is, that a kind of spirits called "trows,"
different in their nature from fairies, have discharged a stone arrow at
her, and wounded her with it. Though no wound can be seen externally,
there are different persons, both male and female, who pretend to feel
it in the flesh, and to cure it by repeating certain words over the cow.
They also fold a sewing needle in a leaf taken from a particular part of
a psalm book, and sew it in the hair of the cow; which is considered not
only as an infallible cure, but which also serves as a charm against
future attacks. This is nearly allied to a practice which was at one
time very prevalent, and of which some traces may perhaps still exist,
in what would be considered a more civilised part of the country, of
wearing a small piece of the branch of the rowan tree, wrapped round
with red thread, and sewn into some part of the garments, to guard
against the effects of an "evil eye," or witchcraft:

      "Rowan-tree and red thread
      Puts the witches to their speed."

In the neighbourhood of Peterhead, there lived, a few years ago, a
famous exorcist, whose ancestors had for several generations practised
the same profession. He was greatly resorted to by parties in the Buchan
district, for curing elfshot cattle, cows whose milk had been
surreptitiously taken away, to recover stolen property and find out
thieves, and put a stop to "cloddings." This latter description of
_diablerie_, is just a repetition of the Cock Lane ghost's tricks, and
occasionally yet occurs. On one occasion the exorcist was bearded in his
own den: for about twenty-five years ago a terrible "clodding" took
place at a farm-house in the parish of Longside, a mile or two from his
own; it defied the united efforts of priest and layman to lay it, and
the operator was called in, and while in the middle of one of his most
powerful exorcisms, was struck on the side of his head with a piece of
peat. The annoyance continued a few weeks, and then ceased altogether.
In the parish of Banchory Ternan, about seven years ago, a "clodding"
took place, which created considerable sensation in the district.

    DUNROSSNESS.


Minor Notes.

_Names of Places in Normandy and Orkney._--In reading Depping's _History
of the Norman Maritime Expeditions_, my attention was directed to
Appendix IX. vol. ii. p. 339., "Des Noms Topographiques de Normandie
dont l'origine est étrangère." Many of the names given there resemble
those in Orkney. I note a few of them.

Depedal. Deepdale, a secluded valley near Kirkwall; _Dalv_, Icelandic, a
valley.

Auppegard, Eppegard in Normandy; Kongsgarth, Herdmansgarth in Orkney;
Icelandic _Gardr_, a field, an enclosure.

Cape La Hogue, derived by M. Depping from _hougr_, a promontory; Hoxay
in Orkney, _hougs_ and _ay_, an island. _Haugs-eid_, isthmus of the
hillock, is another derivation.

Cherbourg, Dep. p. 331.; Suhm, in a note appended, finds the root in his
tongue, _skiair_, _skeer_; Icelandic _Sker_, a sea-rock, the Orkney
_Skerry_, an islet covered at high water.

Houlmes, near Rouen; the Orkney _Holm_, a small island generally
uninhabited.

Yvetot; Toft common in Orkney.

Bye, a dwelling, is the Orkney Bu or Boo, a pure Icelandic word.

Other instances could be given; and there is nothing remarkable in this
when it is considered that the invaders of Orkney and Normandy were the
same people at the same period, and the better preservation of the Norse
tongue in Orkney is readily to be accounted for. In Normandy the
language of the invaders was lost in the French in a very short space of
time, while the Norse continued the language of Orkney and Zetland
during their subjection to the Norwegian earls for a period of 600
years; and only last year, 1850, it was that an old man in Unst in
Zetland, who could speak Norse, died at the age of eighty-seven years;
and except there be in Foula (Fougla, the fowls' island, called Thule in
the Latin charters of its proprietors) a person living who can speak it,
that old tongue is extinct in Britain.

    W.H.F.




Queries.


Minor Queries.

_357. Meaning of Ploydes._--Perhaps the gentleman who has directed his
attention to the folk lore of Lancashire (Vol. iii., p. 55.) can tell
the meaning of the word _ploydes_ in the following rhythmical proverb.
The three parishes of Prescot, Huyton, and Childwall adjoin each other,
and lie to the east of Liverpool:--

      Prescot, Huyton, and merry Childow,
      Three parish churches, all in a row;
      Prescot for mugs, Huyton for _ploydes_,
      And Childow for ringing and singing besides."

    ST. JOHNS.

_358. Green-eyed Monster._--Whence the origin of the "Green-eyed
Monster"? The Italians considered a green iris beautiful, thus Dante
makes Beatrice have "emerald eyes;" again, the Spaniards are loud in
their praise. Whence, then, the epithet in its present sense?

    [?]

_359. Perpetual Lamp._--The ancient Romans are said to have preserved
lights in their sepulchres many ages by the oiliness of gold, resolved
by art into a liquid substance. And it is reported that, at the
dissolution of monasteries, in the time of Henry VIII., there was a lamp
found that had then burnt in a tomb from about 300 years after Christ,
nearly 1200 years.

Two of these subterranean lamps are to be seen in the Museum of Rarities
at Leyden in Holland. One of these lamps, in the papacy of Paul III.,
was found in the tomb of Tullia, Cicero's daughter, which had been shut
up 1550 years.

From 2nd edit. of N. Bailey, φιλόλογος, 1731.

    B.B.

_360. Family of Butts._--A very great favour would be conferred, if any
of your antiquarian correspondents would give me information respecting
the family of Butts of Thornage, co. Norfolk, of which were Sir William
Butts, physician to Hen. VIII.; and Robert Butts, Bishop of Norwich, and
afterwards of Ely. The principal object of the querist is to know
whether this family sprang from that of But, Butte, or Butts, which
attained great civic eminence in Norwich during the thirteenth and two
following centuries.

    COWGILL.

_361. Greek Names of Fishes._--Can any of your learned correspondents
inform me upon what authority the Greek names of fishes occurring in the
following verses from the _Vespæ_, 493, are translated "sprats" and
"mackerel?" I have only Donnegan's very unsatisfactory compilation here.

      "ἢν μὲν ὠνῆταί τις ὀρφῶς, μεμβράδας δὲ μὴ θέλῃ,
      εὐθέως εἴρηχ' ὁ πωλῶν πλησίον τὰς μεμβράδας·
      οὗτος ὀψωνεῖν ἔοιχ' ἄνθρωπος ἐπὶ τυραννίδι," &c.

    NICÆENSIS.

_362. Drimmnitavichillichatan._--Some twenty or thirty years ago there
used to appear regularly in the _Aberdeen_ and _Belfast Almanack's_ list
of fairs, one held annually at the above place in the month of May.
Could any correspondent inform me where it is situated? I think it is in
Argyle or Inverness-shires; but should like to know the precise
locality, as it is not mentioned in any work to which I have access at
present.

    X.Y.Z.

_363. Chalk-back Day._--At Diss, Norfolk, it is customary for the
juvenile populace, on the Thursday before the third Friday in September
(on which latter day a fair and "session" for hiring servants are held),
to mark and disfigure each other's dress with white chalk, pleading a
prescriptive right to be mischievous on "chalk-back day." Does such a
practice exist elsewhere, and what is its origin?

    S. W. RIX.

  Beccles.

364. _Moravian Hymns._--Can any of your readers give me an account of
the earlier editions of the Moravian hymns? In the _Oxford Magazine_ for
July, 1769, some extraordinary specimens are given, which profess to be
taken from "a book of private devotions, printed for the use of the
Unitas Fratrum, or Moravians." One of them is--

      "To you, ye wounds, we pay
      A thousand tears a-day,
      That you have us presented
      With many happy virgin rows.
      Since the year forty,
      Pappa! mamma!
      Your hearts Flamlein,
      Brother Flamlein,
      Gives the creatures
      Virgin hearts and features."

The others look still more like burlesque. I cannot find them in any
Moravian hymn-book which I have seen; and have searched the British
Museum in vain for that which is referred to in the _Oxford Magazine_.
Are they genuine, or a fabrication of Anti-moravians?

    P. H.

365. _Rural and Urban Deans._--The name and office of _rural dean_ is
familiar to every one; but may I ask your clerical readers in London, or
in any other of the large towns of England, whether the office of dean
is still existing among them; or have the _urban deans_ altogether
ceased to be chosen and to act?

    W. FRASER.

366. _Ducks and Drakes._--When a man squanders his fortune, he is said
in vulgar parlance to "make ducks and drakes of his money." Does this
odd expression allude to the thoughtless school-boy practice of throwing
stones as nearly as possible on a parallel with the surface of the
water, whose elastic quality causes them frequently to rebound before
they sink? In my younger days this amusement (so to speak) was called
"ducks and drakes."

    M. W. B.

  Bruges.

367. _Vincent Kidder._--I shall be much obliged by any information
respecting the descent of Vincent Kidder of Aghaboe in the Queen's
County, Ireland, who held a commission as major in Cromwell's army. He
married Ellen Loftus, the granddaughter of Sir Thos. Loftus of Killyan,
one of the sons of Adam Loftus, Archbishop of Dublin; and, in 1670, had
a grant of forfeited lands in the county of Kilkenny. I have reason to
believe that he sprang from a family of that name in Sussex. His son,
also named Vincent, was a lieutenant in Cottingham's regiment at the
battle of the Boyne, Master of the Goldsmith's Company in Dublin in
1696, and High Sheriff of Dublin in 1718. He married Elizabeth, the
daughter of ---- Proudfoot, and left issue. I shall be glad of any
information as to the marriage of the last-named Vincent, and as to the
family of Proudfoot.

    C. (Streatham.)

368. _House at Welling._--Every one who has travelled on the
carriage-road between London and Erith must have noticed at the end of
the village of Welling an old-looking house, with high garden walls, and
a _yew_ hedge about thrice the height of the walls. It is said that one
of our English poets once inhabited this house; but _who_? is a Query to
which no one seems able to give an answer. Perhaps some of your numerous
correspondents may have a Note on the subject, and would kindly furnish
it. It is said by some to have been Young, the author of the _Night
Thoughts_; but this again is denied by others.

    B.

369. _Shropshire, Price of Land._--What was the average number of years'
purchase at which land sold in Shropshire and Montgomery between 1770
and '80? Is there any book where information on this subject can be
found?

    B. R. I.

370. _Legal Time._--The town clerk of Exeter, a short time since, in
reply to the question "What is legal time?" said, that "one of the
courts of law had decided (in reference to a young lady becoming of age
in London) that St. Paul's was so." Now St. Paul's, as well as all other
London clocks, keeps Greenwich time. Query, _Is_ St. Paul's time legal
time? Is it so because it is the cathedral clock of London, or because
it is a commonly recognised standard of time for London?

    EXON.


Minor Queries Answered.

_Thorns of Dauphine._--What is the meaning of the proverb mentioned by
Bishop Jeremy Taylor:

  "The Thorns of Dauphine will never fetch blood, if they do not
  scratch the first day?"--_Sermon XVI._ "Of Growth in Sin," p. 319.
  Lond. 1678. fol.

    RT.

  Warmington.

  [Montaigne, in his _Essays_, book i. chap. lvii., quotes this
  proverb, and gives a clue to its meaning. He says: "For my part I
  believe our souls are adult at twenty, as much as they are ever
  like to be, and as capable then as ever. A soul that has not by
  that time given evident earnest of its force and virtue will never
  after come to proof. Natural parts and excellences produce what
  they have of vigorous and fine within that term, or never:

      'Si l'espine non picque quand nai,
      A peue que picque jamai,'

  as they say in Dauphiny."]

_Inscription at Lyons._--In Bishop Burnet's _Travels_ (1685), he
mentions a monumental inscription which he saw at Lyons, of a certain
lady, "Quæ nimia pia"--"Facta est Impia," whom he conjectures, and with
some probability, to have been a Christian lady, declared impious
because she refused to confess the "Gods many and Lords many" of the
heathen. The conclusion of the epitaph is perplexing: it states that her
husband dedicated it to her and her son's memory--under "the axe"--"Sub
asciâ dedicavit." I have looked in vain for any explanation of this
expression, in any account within my reach of Roman funerals: possibly
some of your correspondents may help me to an explanation. Burnet, while
he is acute in noting the contradictory expression above, wholly
overlooks this. It may mean that her husband performed this act of piety
in the face of danger and persecution,--as we should say, "with the axe
hanging over his head;" but then the epitaph commences with the letters
D. M., signifying "Diis Manibus," leading to the conclusion that the
husband was not himself a Christian, though respecting Christianity in
the person of his wife. I had not originally intended to copy the
epitaph; but as it is not long, and may help the speculations of your
readers who have not access to Burnet's _Travels_, p. 5., now a rare
book, I subjoin it:--

                    "D. M.
              Et memoriæ eternæ
                Sutiæ Anthidis
        Quæ vixit Annis XXV. M. XI. DV.
            Quæ dum nimia pia fuit
                Facta est Impia
                      et
               Attio Probatiolo
      Cecalius Callistio Conjux et Pater
                 et sibi vivo
               Ponendum Curavit
                      et
             Sub ascia dedicavit."

    A. B. R.

  [Our correspondent will find a more correct reading of this
  inscription, with some remarks on Bishop Burnet's account of it,
  in _Reflexions on Dr. Gilbert Burnet's Travels into Switzerland,
  Italy, and certain Parts of Germany and France, &c._, divided into
  five letters. Written originally in Latin, by Mons. ***, and now
  done into English. 1688, pp. 23-29.]

_Turnpikes._--What is the earliest instance and origin of this word, and
when did the system of turnpikes commence? In the will of Walter
Ildryzerd, of Bury, dated 1468, mention is made of two pastures without
the town "j vocat' _Turnepyke_."

    BURIENSIS.

  [Turnpikes or barriers were erected as early as A.D. 1267, as we
  find a grant of a penny for each waggon passing through a manor.
  See _Index or Catalogue of the Patent Rolls_, Hen. III. 51., m.
  21., "Quod I. de Ripariis capiat in feod. 1 denar. de qualibet
  carectâ transeunte per maneria sua de Thormerton et Littleton, co.
  Glouc." A toll was also imposed in the reign of Edward III. for
  repairing the road between St. Giles and Temple Bar.]




Replies.


GENERAL JAMES WOLFE.

(Vol. iv., p. 438.)

In answer to the Queries put to me by [Gh.] I have to state--

1st. That I am totally unable to give any information relative to the
family of Mrs. Wolfe.

2d. Edward Wolfe was not, I believe, a native of Westerham, and only
resided there when not on active duty. His wife lived there some years,
but could only have been staying temporarily in the house where her son
was born, as it always was the residence of the vicar; the room, named
after him, is still pointed out where James Wolfe drew his first breath.
Quebec House was only rented by Edward Wolfe: to this house James was
very early removed, and, as I have always been informed, always resided
in it till he entered on his military studies; if so, he must have been
educated in the neighbourhood.

3rd. Sir Jeffrey Amherst is the same person as [Gh.] alludes to; I was
wrong, perhaps, in using the term "patronise." Wolfe and he were,
however, staunch friends through life; Amherst ever encouraged Wolfe,
who was liable to fits of despondency, and always represented him at
head quarters as one worthy of a high command in those trying times.
Amherst was afterwards executor to Mrs. Wolfe's will.

I feel gratified that the letters mentioned corroborate my assertion as
to his birth; not only is the date I gave on the tablet in Westerham
church, but was informed of the various accounts by a former curate of
Westerham, who assured me the date on the tablet was the correct one.

The circumstance of Barré's friendship with Wolfe is interesting, and I
am now enabled to mention another friend, on whom Wolfe equally relied,
viz. General Hugh Debbieg, who fought with him at Louisbourgh, and
afterwards followed him to Quebec, where he directed part of the
engineering operations.

The soldier who supported Wolfe after he received his death-wound, was
named James; he was in the artillery; he likewise served at Louisbourgh
and Quebec, and survived till 1812, when he died at Carlisle Castle,
where he had been stationed for many years as a bombardier, aged
ninety-two.

In no notice of him I have read, is he mentioned as having been at
Carthagena. The _Penny Cyclopædia_ mentions the chief engagements he was
in, but makes no allusion to Carthagena whatever.

Southey and Gleig contemplated writing the life of Wolfe; but some
unknown circumstance prevented the completion of so laudable a design.

In George's _Westerham Journal_ is a curious account of Mrs. Wolfe
adopting a young man named Jacob Wolfe, and of Lord Amherst obtaining,
by her representations, a place of 700_l._ a-year for him. It is
extracted from Trusler's _Memoirs_; but being too lengthy for insertion
in "NOTES AND QUERIES," I will copy it out, if [Gh.] wishes to have it.

In Thackery's _Life of the Earl of Chatham_ is mentioned the following
anecdote, which I have often seen otherwise applied: George II. was once
expressing his admiration of Wolfe, when some one observed that the
General was mad. "Oh! mad is he?" said the King; "then I wish he would
bite some of my other generals." Other information occurs in the same
work.

I have learnt that a family named Wolfe was settled at Saffron Walden,
Essex, in the last century, and the obituary of _Sylvanus Urban for
1794_, p. 770., records the death of the lady of Thomas Wolfe, Esq., of
that place. Does this give a clue as to the county in which George Wolfe
settled?

I had intended to have applied myself to "NOTES AND QUERIES" relative to
our hero; and though I have been anticipated, I will still endeavour to
follow up my enquiries, and all I can obtain shall be at the service of
[Gh.], in the hope that something substantial may be done to rescue from
the comparative oblivion the life of one of England's greatest sons.

    H. G. D.


"FLEMISH ACCOUNT."

(Vol. i., p. 8.)

The following examples may serve as further illustrations towards
determining the origin and use of the expression.

I.

     "Within this hall neither rich nor yett poore
      Wold do for me ought although I shold dye.
      Which seeing, I gat me out of the doore,
      Where _Flemynges_ began on me for to cry,
      'Master, what will you copen or by?
      Fyne felt hattes, or spectacles to reede?
      Lay down your silver, and here you may speede'"

      _Minor Poems_ of Lydgate [1420]. London,
      Lackpenny. Ed. Per. Soc. 1840, p. 105.

This is curious, as indicating that the word "Fleming," in the fifteenth
century, had become almost synonymous with "trader."

II.

      "_Julia._ I have heard enough of England: have you nothing
                    to return upon the Netherlands?

      "_Beamont._ Faith, very little to any purpose. He has been
                beforehand with us, _as his countrymen are in
                their Trade_, and taken up so many vices for the
                use of England, that he has left almost none for
                the Low Countries."

      Dryden's _Dutch at Amboyna_, Act II. Sc. 8.

      "_Towerson._ Tell 'em I seal that service with my blood;
                And, dying, wish to all their factories,
                And all the famous merchants of our isle,
                That wealth their generous industry deserves,
                But dare not hope it with _Dutch partnership_."

      _Ibid._ Act V. Sc. last.

III.

                         "Yet, Urswick,
                We'll not abate one penny, what in Parliament
                Hath freely been contributed; we must not:
                Money gives soul to action. Our competitor
                _The Flemish counterfeit_, with James of Scotland,
                Will prove what courage need and want can nourish,
                Without the food of fit supplies."

      Ford [1634], _Perkin Warbeck_, Act III. Sc. 1.

      "_Cuddy._ Yes, I was ten days together there the last
                Shrove-tide.

      "_2nd Clown._ How could that be, when there are but seven days
                in the week?

      "_Cuddy._ Prithee, peace! I reckon _stila nova_ as a
                traveller; thou understandest as a freshwater
                farmer, that never saw'st a week beyond sea. _Ask
                any soldier that ever received his pay but in the
                Low Countries, and he'll tell thee there are Eight
                days in the week there hard by._ How dost thou think
                they rise in High Germany, Italy, and those remoter
                places?"--Rowley, Decker, and Ford.

      _Witch of Edmonton_, Act III. Sc. 1.

"This passage is explained by the following lines of Butler:

      'The soldier does it every day,
      _Eight to the week_, for sixpence pay.'"

      Note by the Editor, Hartley Coleridge, in the
      Glossary. Ed. London: Moxon, 1839.

IV. De Thou gives the following anecdote, when speaking of a defeat,
more disgraceful, however, than disastrous, which befel the French on
the borders of Flanders, A.D. 1555, in which many nobles and gentry were
captured by the Flemings:

  "Cùm delectus illi ex CCCC peditibus et MCC equitibus conflati,
  quorum dux erat Jallius ex primariâ in Andibus nobilitatæ vir, in
  hosticum excurrissent, et magnas prædas abegissent, dum redirent
  solutis ordinibus homines ut plurimum militiæ ignari, inter
  Rigiacum Atrebatum et Bapalmam, ab Alsimontio loci illius præfecto
  secus viam et oppositam silvam ac subjectum rivum, insidiis
  excepti sunt, et ab exiguo numero cæsi, ac majorem partem, cum
  effugium non esset capti, non sine verborum ludibrio, nimirum,
  _Nobiles Galliæ non appensos a Belgis capi_! Quod dicebatur
  allusione factâ ad Monetæ aureæ Anglicanæ genus, quod vulgò
  nobilium nomine indigitatur."--Thuani _Hist._ lib. XVI. ad. a.
  1555, tom. i. p. 494. ed. Genev. 1626.

  "When these levies, made up of 400 foot soldiers and 1200
  horsemen, whose leader was La Jaille, one of the principal
  nobility of Anjou, had made a foray on the enemy's border, and
  driven off an immense booty; upon their retreat, which, being men
  for the most part utterly ignorant of military service, they
  conducted with great disorder, between Arras and Bapaume, they
  were entrapped by Osmand, who commanded in those parts, into an
  ambuscade set for them close to their line of march, with a wood
  in their front and a river below them. A few of them were slain,
  but the greater part, inasmuch as there was no way of escape, were
  taken prisoners: which gave occasion to the following satirical
  play upon words: '_That Flemings had taken French Nobles without
  first weighing them!_' The play on the words, of course, alluding
  to the English gold coins commonly known by the name of 'the
  noble.'"

The last instance shows the common opinion entertained of the Flemings,
as being traders far too keen to take any coin except it were of full
tale and weight. And although the expression "Flemish account" may have
originated from their practice as merchants, yet, from the second
instance quoted from Ford and Decker, it may not unreasonably be
inferred that it received greater currency from their method of paying
the soldiers who also served as mercenaries in the wars of the Low
Countries.

    E. A. D.


POPE AND FLATMAN.

(Vol. iv., p. 132.)

MR. BARTON, in his "Note" on Pope and Flatman, inquires whether the
coincidence mentioned by him has been noticed before. I believe it has,
by more than one commentator, and among others by Croly in his edition
of Pope, London, E. J. Valpy, 1835. Dr. Croly introduces the ode of "The
Dying Christian to his Soul," with these remarks, from which it will be
seen that Flatman was not the only source of Pope's inspiration:

  "Pope, in a letter to Steele, at whose suggestion he had adopted
  the subject, gives this brief history of his composition:--'You
  have it,' he says, 'as Cowley calls it, warm from the brain; it
  came to me the first moment I waked this morning; yet you'll see
  it was not so absolutely inspiration but that I had in my head not
  only the verses of Hadrian, but the fine fragment of Sappho.' Pope
  omitted to observe the close similarity of his lines to those of
  Flatman, an obscure writer of the century before. Between his
  rough versification and the polished elegance of Pope there can be
  no comparison; but the thoughts are the same. Prior translated
  Hadrian's ode with more fidelity, but less good fortune."

    HENRY H. BREEN.

  St. Lucia.


DERIVATION OF "LONDON."

(Vol. iv., p. 437.)

I beg to suggest that the word _London_ is derived from the Celtic
_Luan_, "the moon," and _dun_, "a city on a hill;" thus _Luandun_ would
mean "the city of the moon," _i.e._ of "the temple of the moon." I have
seen it stated somewhere, that the site of St. Paul's was formerly that
of a temple of Diana: if this be true, it gives weight to my definition
of the word. I would also suggest that the name of _Greenwich_ is
indicative of the religious worship of the ancient people of Britain; as
_Grian_ is "the sun" in Celtic, and no doubt Greenwich could boast of
its "Grynean grove."

      "His tibi Grynæi nemoris dicatur origo:
      Ne quis sit lucus, quo se plus jactet Apollo."

    FRANCIS CROSSLEY.

M. C. E. is referred to the two following passages from Fuller, if he
has not already met with them:--

  "That it was so termed from _Lan Dian_, a temple of Diana
  (standing where now St. Paul's doth) is most likely, in my
  opinion."--_Worthies_, art. "London."

  "This renders their conceit not unlikely who will have London so
  called from _Llan Dian_, which signifieth in British, 'the temple
  of Diana.'"--_Church History_, i. § 2.

    J. EASTWOOD.

The name of _London_ is certainly older than the Romans, and is
probably, therefore, as your correspondent says, British. Its
significance, if any, therefore, is to be sought in Welsh. Now, your
correspondent is certainly quite wrong as to the meaning of _Llan_ in
Welsh. It always means, here at any rate, _church_, not _plain_.
Possibly your correspondent was thinking of _Llano_. The word is written
in Welsh _Llyndon_, or _Llyndain_, which also speaks against its being
compounded with _Llan_. The word certainly _might_ mean anything: but I
know of no satisfactory explanation having been given for it as yet. The
only words for _town_ in Welsh are, I believe, _tre_ "city," or _caer_
"castle,"--as parts of compound words, I mean.

    SC.

  Carmarthen.

I cannot think that M. C. E.'s etymology of _London_ is a correct one;
nor did I know that the British _Llan_ means a "level place generally."
I take it that originally _Llan_ meant no more than "an inclosure," as
we see in _winllan_, "a vineyard," "an inclosure for vines;" _perllan_,
"an orchard" (literally a pear-yard). As churchyards were probably for
some time almost the only inclosures in their districts, this will
explain why the names of churches in Wales so commonly begin with
_Llan_. Llanvair, Llanilltid, Llandilo, &c. were the _inclosures_, or
yards, in which churches dedicated to St. Mary, St. Iltyd, St. Teilo,
&c. were built, though in the course of time these names became applied
to the churches themselves. The word _don_ is nothing more than _din_,
or _dinas_, "a fortress," as we see in Lugdunum, Virodunum, Londinium,
Dumbarton, Dunmore, &c.

Old chroniclers say that the city of London was nearly, if not entirely,
surrounded by water, which on the north, north-east, and south sides
spread out into considerable lakes. Present names of localities in and
about the City show traces of this. Finsbury and Moorfields take their
names from the fens and moors, or meres, which were partially reclaimed
from the lake which spread to the north and north-east, almost from the
city wall. To the south the Thames extended far beyond its present
boundary, forming an extensive lake. _Fen_church Street, _Turnmill_
Street, _Fleet_ Street, show that there were streams and fens to the
east and west.

Bearing in mind that British names were generally descriptive of the
locality, may not the situation of old London furnish a clue to its
etymology? Was not London then truly and descriptively _Llyn-dun_, or
_Llin-dun_, the fortified place or fortress in or on the _lyn_ or lake?

    CUDYN GWYN.


Replies to Minor Queries.

_Legend of the Robin Redbreast_ (Vol. ii., p. 164.).--The following
beautiful legend of the Robin Redbreast, which I have just met with, was
quite new to me. If you think it likely to be so to T. Y. or any other
of your readers, you will perhaps find a place for it.

  "_Eusebia._--Like that sweet superstition current in Brittany,
  which would explain the cause why the robin redbreast has always
  been a favourite and _protégé_ of man. While our Saviour was
  bearing HIS cross, one of these birds, they say, took one thorn
  from HIS crown, which dyed its breast; and ever since that time
  robin redbreasts have been the friends of man."--_Communications
  with the Unseen World_, p. 26.

    W. FRASER.

_Monk and Cromwell_ (Vol. iv., p. 381.).--Will your correspondent state
by what _intermarriage_ the estate granted to the Duke of Albemarle,
vested in Oliver Cromwell, who died in 1821; and how, if he knows, it
departed from Monk? If acquired by purchase from the successors of Monk,
the interest ceases.

    G.

_Souling_ (Vol. iv., p. 381.).--The custom of "souling", described by
MR. W. FRASER, is carried on with great zeal and energy in this
neighbourhood on All Souls' Day. The song which the children sing is
exactly the same as MR. FRASER gives, with the exception of the second
verse. In the evening, grown persons go round singing and collecting
contributions from house to house. It is universally believed in this
neighbourhood to be a remnant of the old custom of begging money, to be
applied to the purpose of procuring masses for the souls of the dead.

    LEWIS EVANS.

  Sandbach, Cheshire.

_Clekit House_ (Vol. iv., p. 473.).--With reference to this Query, I beg
to suggest the following explanation. In Scotland, a _cleek_ signifies a
hook; and to _cleek_, is to hook or join together: thus, a lady and
gentleman walking arm-in-arm are said to be _cleekit_ together. The word
is in full use at present, and has been so for centuries; and I think it
not improbable that at the time the will referred to was written, the
word might be common to both countries. On this supposition the meaning
would be, that the "two tenements" communicated with each other in some
way--probably by a bridge thrown across--so as to form _one_ house,
which obtained its name from their being thus joined or _cleekit_
together.

    J. S. B.

_Peter Talbot_ (Vol. iv., pp. 239. 458.).--The biography of this
individual, who was the titular prelate presiding over the see of Dublin
from 1669 to 1680, is given very fully in D'Alton's _Memoirs of the
Archbishops of Dublin_.

    R.

_Races in which Children, &c._ (Vol. iv., p. 442.).--When consulting my
Lexicon this morning, I met under "Ἀπὸ" with the following,
καλέουσι ἀπὸ τῶν μητέρων ἑωϋτοὺς, they name themselves after,
or from their mothers, Herodot. i. 173. Not having the work, I am unable
to pursue the search; but perhaps the reference may assist THEOPHYLACT
in his inquiry.

    J. V. S.

  Sydenham.

For the information of THEOPHYLACT, I transcribe the following passage
from Johnson's _Selections from the Mahabharat_, p. 67. The note is from
the pen of Professor Wilson:--

  "Among the Bhotias a family of brothers has a wife in common; and
  we can scarcely question the object of the arrangement, when the
  unproductive region which these people occupy is considered....
  What led to its adoption by the Nair tribe in Malabar is not so
  easy to conjecture. At present its object seems to be to preserve
  the purity of descent, which it is thought is more secure on the
  female than on the male side; and accordingly, the child claims
  property, or even the Raj, not through his father, but his
  mother."

    RECHABITE.

_Bacon a Poet_ (Vol. iv., p. 474.).--Whether Lord Bacon was, or was not,
the author of the well-known lines noted and queried by R. CS., I will
leave the intended editor of Hackneyed Quotations to decide, hoping that
he will soon make his appearance as public umpire in all such cases.

Whether Lord Bacon was, or was not, really _a poet_, I will leave to the
decision of those who are conversant with the glorious works of his mind
_and imagination_.

But I have something to say to the note with which R. CS. follows up his
query:--"Sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord Bacon, and Bacon the Sculptor, are the
only conspicuous men of the name, and none of them, that I know, wrote
verses."

This must not go unchallenged in the truthful pages of "NOTES AND
QUERIES." "Pray, Sir," said a lady to me once, with a very complimentary
air, "though no great Latin scholar, may I not judge by your name that
you are a descendant of THE GREAT FRIAR BACON?" To which I could only
reply, "Madam, I have never yet discovered the bend sinister on our
escutcheon." From that proud moment I have been penetrated with the
profoundest respect for the name of Roger; and I cannot patiently see
the biggest pig of our sty namelessly consigned to oblivion in the pages
of "NOTES AND QUERIES". Pray assure R. CS. that the three Bacons of whom
he makes mention are _not_ "the only conspicuous men of the name." And
as to the rest, "none of them that I know wrote verses," I beg to refer
him to Lord Bacon's _Metrical Version of the Psalms_, vol. iv. p. 489.
of his Works, ed. 1740.

    PORCULUS.

Was not the _poet_ Bacon, quoted by Boswell, the Rev. Phannel Bacon,
D.D., Rector of Balden in Oxfordshire, and Vicar of Bramber in Sussex,
who died January 2, 1783? He was not only an admirable poet, but was a
famous punster, and is described as possessing an admirable fund of
humour.

    MYFANWY.

_Story referred to by Jeremy Taylor_ (Vol. iv., p. 326.).--Unless the
_Legenda Aurea_ be prior in date to the twelfth century, I can refer
your correspondent to a still earlier authority for the tale in
question--Wace (_Life of St. Nicholas_), in whose pages it appears more
at length, but substantially the same.

According to (I presume) the earlier historian, the case was brought
within the jurisdiction of St. Nicholas by the "ieueu" receiving an
image of the saint in pledge, and the debtor taking his expurgatory oath
thereon.

The story is told of a saint who lived in the fourth century, and we
may, at all events, consider it as being much older than Wace himself.

    F. I.

_Share of Presbyters in Ordination_ (Vol. iv., p. 273.).--As a
contribution towards answering MR. GATTY'S question, I send the
following extract from Hooker:

  "Here it will perhaps be objected, that the power of ordination
  itself was not everywhere peculiar and proper unto bishops, as may
  be seen by a council of Carthage, which showeth their church's
  order to have been, that presbyters should, together with the
  bishop, lay hands upon the ordained. But doth it therefore follow
  that the power of ordination was not principally and originally in
  the bishop?... With us, even at this day, presbyters are licensed
  to do as much as that council speaketh of, _if any be
  present_."--_Eccl. Pol._ b. vii, c. vi. 5. vol. iii. pp. 207-8.
  ed. Keble, 1836.

    J. C. R.

_Weever's Funeral Monument_ (Vol. iv., p. 474.).--Weever was buried in
the old church of St. James, Clerkenwell, which was formerly part of the
Priory called _Ecclesia Beatæ Mariæ de Fonte Clericorum_, for nuns of
the order of St. Benedict. The inscription, on a plate shaped to a
pillar near the chancel, has been preserved by Stow, in his _Survey of
London_, p. 900., 1633; and by Strype, in his edition of the _Survey of
London_, book iv. p. 65. Fuller, in his _Church History_, vol. ii p.
208., edit. 1840, informs us that--

  "Weever died in London in the fifty-sixth year of his age, and was
  buried in St. James, Clerkenwell, where he appointed this epitaph
  for himself:

      "'Lancashire gave me breath
        And Cambridge education,
      Middlesex gave me death
        And this church my humation.
      And Christ to me hath given
      A place with him in heaven.'

  "The certain date of his death I cannot attain; but, by proportion,
  I collect it to be about the year of our Lord 1634."

The date supplied by Storer, in his _History of Clerkenwell_, p. 186.,
is "Anno Domini 1632." The epitaph given by Fuller, Strype has appended
to the original inscription. Mr. Storer adds:

  "When the church was taken down, the Society of Antiquaries gave
  orders for a diligent search to be made after this tablet, but
  without success; which is accounted for by a correspondent in the
  _Gentleman's Magazine_ [see vol. lviii. part 2. p. 600.], that it
  had been stolen a few years previously, but was perfectly
  remembered by an inhabitant to have occupied the situation which
  has been described."

    J. Y.

  Hoxton.

_Dial Motto at Karlsbad_ (Vol. iv., p. 471.).--I doubt not the accuracy
of Sir Nicholas Tindal's copy of the inscription, but I suspect that the
painter of the red capitals made a mistake, and that the _d_ in the word
_cedit_ should have been the red letter instead of the _e_; if so, the
chronogram would be as follows M.DCCVVVVIIIIIIIII, _i.e._ 1729.

    H. F.

The red letters undoubtedly compose a chronogram; E in such compositions
represents 250. The date is therefore A.D. 1480.

    E. H. D. D.

_Cabal_ (Vol. iv., p. 443.).--The word "cabal" occurs in two different
senses in _Hudibras_; but I have only before me the Edinburgh edition of
1779, and so cannot tell whether Butler used it at a date previous to
that assigned to its coinage by Burnet. _Hudibras_ was written before
the Restoration, at all events; but I have no opportunity of consulting
the first edition, which was well known for ten years before the _Cabal_
of 1672.

      "For mystic learning, wondrous able,
      In magic talisman and _cabal_."

      _Hudibras_, Part I. Canto I. 529.

Upon which I find this learned note:--

  "Raymund Lully interprets _cabal_ out of the Arabic, to signify
  Scientia superabundans, which his commentator, Cornelius Agrippa,
  by over-magnifying, has rendered 'a very superfluous foppery.'
  Vid. J. Pici, _Mirandulæ de Magia et Cabala_, Apol. tome i. pp.
  110. 111.; Sir Walter Raleigh's _History of the World_, part i,
  book i. p. 67., edit. 1614; Purchas' _Pilgrims_, part ii. lib.
  vi. pp. 796, 797, 798.; Scot's _Discovery of Witchcraft_, cap.
  xi.; Dee's _Book of Spirits, with Dr. Meric Casaubon's Preface_;
  Churchill's _Voyages, &c._, vol. ii. p. 528., second edition;
  Bailey's _Dictionary_, folio edition, under the word 'cabala;'
  Jacob's _Law Dictionary_, under the word 'cabal;' and _British
  Librarian_, No. 6. for June, 1737, p. 340."

The other instance I am adducing gives us "cabal" in its common
acceptation:--

      "Set up committees of _cabals_
      To pack designs without the walls."

      Part III. Canto II. 945.

I again copy a note from Dr. Grey:--

  "A sneer probably upon Clifford, Ashley, Burlington, Arlington,
  Lauderdale, who were called the CABAL in King Charles II.'s time,
  from the initial letters of their names.--See _Echard_, vol. iii.
  p. 251."

Your correspondent E. H. D. D. may be glad of these two quotations, and
I quite agree with him in ascribing an earlier date than that mentioned
by Burnet to the word "cabal" in the sense of "a secret council." The
transition from its original sense was easy and natural, and the
application to King Charles's confidential advisers ingenious.

    RT.

  Warmington.

_Rectitudines Singularum Personarum_ (Vol. iv., p. 442.).--In reply to
the inquiries of H. C. C., let me refer him to pp. xi. and xxv. of the
preface and list of MSS. in vol. i. of the _Ancient Laws, &c. of
England_, edited by Mr. Thorpe, under the direction of the late Record
Commission. He will there find that the real MS. site of that document
is stated to be in the library of Corpus Christi, Cambridge, and to be
of the date of the tenth century. It is not stated upon what ground so
early a date is assigned to it; but as so competent a judge as the
editor seems to give that date without any expression of doubt, we may
presume that there is satisfactory proof of the fact. I do not observe
the document mentioned in Wanley's catalogue, and Nasmith's more recent
one is not at hand to refer to. The matter contained in it does not (at
least in my judgment) _necessarily_ indicate so early a date, inasmuch
as parallel, and even identical, rights and customs, connected with the
_status_ of persons and tenure of land, were in active existence at a
much later period of our history. It would certainly be more
satisfactory to know the precise grounds, whether extrinsic or
intrinsic, on which the date has been fixed.

With regard to the old Latin version, I will not undertake to vindicate
it except against _one_ of the criticisms of H. C. C. He objects that
_læden_ is translated _minare_. The word "minare" is used in the
translation twice, once for _driving_, and once for _leading_; and I
question whether the translator could have found a more appropriate word
to serve this double purpose than the authentic verb _menare_ or
_minare_, from which the French _mener_ has been derived.

I cannot so easily justify him for translating "bôc-riht" by "rectitudo
testamenti;" yet as the power of testamentary disposition was one of the
most signal attributes of bôc-riht, I cannot say that he has much
misrepresented the import of the original word.

The document, which is evidently a private compilation, seems to be a
custumal, or coustumier, of a district, or some considerable portion of
the country. The German lawyers would call the collection a landrecht in
one sense of that term, or, as the translator has called it, a
"landirectum." The heading is by no means an appropriate one. Whether
the writer intended to compile a code of the customs and obligations of
land tenure, free and unfree, coextensive with the Saxon name, or merely
to represent those of a certain district with which he happened to be
acquainted, is a matter open to question.

H. C. C. is perhaps not aware that the document has been examined,
corrected, translated into German, and made the subject of a very
masterly dissertation, by Dr. Heinrich Leo, of Halle. It is frequently
referred to by Lappenberg in his _Anglo-Saxon History_, and became known
(at least in the translation) to Sir H. Ellis in time to make copious
extracts from it in the second volume of his _Introduction to Domesday_.

    E. S.

_Stanzas in Childe Harold_ (Vol. iv, pp. 223. 285. 323.).--In reply to
T. W. I will merely refer him and your other correspondents upon this
subject to page 391. of Moore's _Life of Byron_, 1 vol. edition, 1844,
where will be found this passage, in Letter 323, addressed to Mr.
Murray:--

  "What does 'thy waters _wasted_ them' mean (in the Canto)? _That
  is not me._ Consult the MS. always."

I am fully aware this will not interpret the meaning of the passage, but
it will go far to satisfy your correspondents that their emendations and
suggestions do not completely answer Lord Byron's query in the letter
referred to by

    LEON.

  London.

_The Island and Temple of Ægina_ (Vol. iv., pp. 255. 412.).--Having
been, some time since, greatly pleased by a fine engraving of the ruined
Temple of Jupiter Panhellenius in Ægina (but unaccompanied by any
description), and having had a well executed water-colour drawing made
therefrom, my interest was aroused on the subject, and I searched among
books within reach for particulars on the subject of what there seems
every reason to regard as the oldest temple in Greece, with the single
exception of that of Corinth. After a patient search I found Fosbroke's
_Foreign Topography_ (4to. edition, 1828, pp. 3, 4, 5.) to contain the
best account of those interesting ruins. The work is not a scarce one
in good libraries: I shall therefore be concise in the extracts from it.
The article entitled "Ægina (Greece)" states that the remains of the
Temple of Jupiter Panhellenius (which are engraved in the _Ionian
Antiquities_) prove it to have been of the Doric order; that it had six
columns in front, but only twelve on the side, in opposition to the
usual custom among Greek architects of adding one column more than
double the number of those in front. The architecture is said closely to
approach that of the hexastyle hypæthral Temple of Pæstum. Williams, in
his _Travels_, expresses the opinion that this Temple of Jupiter is
older than that of Theseus or the Parthenon. In Dodwell's _Greece_, too,
there is an ample description of it. He represents it to have been part
of the ruins of an ancient city, perhaps of Oië. Twenty-five columns
were left entire in his day; together with the greater part of the
epistylion, or architrave. The cornice, however, with the metopæ and
triglyphs, have all fallen. The view of this gloriously positioned
temple must have been magnificent from the sea; while the details of the
building must have been equally delighting to the near spectator. The
temple was built of soft porous stone, coated with a thin stucco, which
must have given it a marble appearance. The epistylia were painted, and
the cornice elegantly ornamented in a similar manner. The pavement was
also covered with a thick stucco, painted vermilion. Chandler (_Greece_,
12-15.) describes traces of the peribolus of this temple; and Clarke
styles it at once the most ancient and remarkable in Greece. I may add
that the Æginetans were celebrated for their works in bronze, for fine
medals (the art of coining money indeed being first introduced by the
inhabitants of this island), for their terra cotta vases, &c. Fosbroke's
excellent _Cyclopædia of Antiquities_ may be with advantage consulted in
respect to the Eginetic school of art.

    J. J. S.

  The Cloisters, Temple.

_Herschel Anticipated_ (Vol. iv., p. 233.).--I cannot inform ÆGROTUS who
was declared to be mad for believing the sun's motion, but Herschel was
anticipated by Lalande (_Mémoires_, 1776), who inferred it from the
sun's rotation; also by Professor Wilson, of Glasgow (_Thoughts on
Universal Gravitation_, 1777), and, earlier than these, by the Rev. Mr.
Michell, in _Philosophical Transactions_, 1767. Mayer (_De Motu
Fixarum_, 1760) mentions the hypothesis, and rejects it.

    ALTRON.

_Wyle Cop_ (Vol. iv., pp. 116. 243.).--_Cop_ is not a _hill_ or _head_,
as Mr. Lawrence supposes, and as the word certainly signifies in some
parts of England, but a _bank_. The artificial banks which confine the
Dee at and below Chester were called fifty years ago, and I dare say are
still called, _Cops_, with distinctive names. By SALOPIAN'S account,
_Wyle Cop_ is such a bank. I cannot explain _Wyle_, but think it
probable that it was the name of some former proprietor of the ground.
It however no more needs explanation than if it were joined to _Street_
or _Lane_, instead of to _Cop_.

    E. H. D. D.

_Macfarlane Manuscripts_ (Vol. iv., p. 406.).--In reply to your
correspondent ANTIQUARIENSIS, I have to inform you that the "Macfarlane
Collections" preserved in the Advocates' Library, Edinburgh, are chiefly
of an "ecclesiastic nature." In Turnbull's _Fragmenta Scoto-Monastica_,
published by Stevenson of Edinburgh, 1842, I find it stated that--

  "Mr. Walter Macfarlan of Macfarlan (_Scoticè_, of that Ilk) was an
  eminent antiquary, who devoted his attentions strictly to the
  historical monuments of his own country, especially the
  ecclesiastic remains. He caused to be made, at his own expense, by
  his clerk, one Tait, copies of most of the chartularies accessible
  in his time. These are distinguished for their fidelity and
  neatness. Mr. Macfarlan died 5th June, 1767, and his MSS. were
  purchased by the Faculty of Advocates."

Of these valuable and highly important chartularies there has been
printed, 1. Aberdeen; 2. Arbroath; 3. Balmerino; 4. Dryburgh; 5.
Dunfermline; 6. Kelso; 7. Lindores; 8. Melros; 9. Moray; 10. St.
Andrews; and 11. Scone.

According to Douglas, in his _Baronage of Scotland_, folio, 1798--

  "Mr. Macfarlane was a man of parts, learning, and knowledge, a
  most ingenious antiquary, and by far the best genealogist of his
  time. He was possessed of the most valuable collection of
  materials for a work of this kind of any man in the kingdom, which
  he collected with great judgment, and at a considerable expense,
  and to which we always had, and still have, free access. This
  sufficiently appears by the many quotations from Macfarlane's
  collections, both in the Peerage and Baronage of Scotland. In
  short, he was a man of great benevolence, an agreeable companion,
  and a sincere friend.

  "He married Lady Elizabeth Erskine, daughter of Alexander, sixth
  earl of Kelly, and died without issue in June, 1767."

In the year 1846 there was engraved at the expense of W. B. C. C.
Turnbull, Esq., advocate, a fine portrait of Macfarlane, from the
original painting in the Library of the Society of Scottish Antiquaries.
Of this plate it is believed that only a few "proofs upon India paper"
were thrown off for presents.

    T. G. S.

  Edinburgh.




Miscellaneous.


NOTES ON BOOKS, SALES, CATALOGUES, ETC.

When Heminge and Condell put forth the first folio of Shakspeare in
1623, as if with a fine prescience of the immortal fame which was
destined to await the writings of their "so worthy Friend and Fellow,"
they addressed the volume to all, "from the most able to him that can
but read." And it is obvious from the moderate price at which it has
been issued, that the proprietor of the handsome one-volume edition
which has just appeared under the title of _The Lansdowne Shakspeare_
looks for purchasers within the same wide range. The book is indeed well
calculated to win favour from all classes. The text, which is based on
that of Collier, compared with that of the first folio and the editions
of Steevens, Malone, Knight, &c., is clearly and distinctly printed; the
names of the characters being given, not only at full length, and in the
middle of the page, but also in red ink. The stage directions are
distinguished in the like manner. It has, moreover, the Dedicatory
Address and Commendatory Verses from the original edition; and, what
certainly deserves especial mention, an admirable facsimile by Robinson
of the portrait by Droeshout, which, on the authority of Ben Jonson's
well-known declaration, that it was a work--

      "Wherein the Graver had a strife
      With Nature, to out doo the life:
      O could he but have drawne his wit
      _As well in brasse as he hath hit
      His face_; the Print would then surpasse
      All that was ever writ in brasse"--

is by many regarded as the most authentic portrait of the great poet.
Altogether, therefore, _The Lansdowne Shakspeare_ is a beautiful book,
and well deserves to be both the library and travelling companion of
every lover of poetry--of every student of Shakspeare.

Our correspondent, Dr. Henry, has published a miscellaneous volume under
the title of _Unripe Windfalls_, which consists of some amusing _vers de
société_--a Letter addressed to ourselves, containing some very
trenchant criticism on the obscurities of Lord Byron; and, lastly, some
specimens of Dr. Henry's _Virgilian Commentaries_, some few of which
have appeared in our columns. This fact, coupled with the letter
addressed to ourselves, must preclude us from speaking of the volume in
those terms of commendation which we should otherwise have felt it right
to employ.

_Outlines of Comparative Physiology touching the Structure and
Development of the Races of Animals Living and Extinct_, by L. Agassiz
and A. A. Gould, _edited from the Revised Edition and greatly enlarged_
by T. Wright, M.D., is the new issue of Bohn's _Scientific Library_. The
present volume forms the first part of the _Principles of Zoology_,
which was designed by Professor Agassiz, in conjunction with Mr. Gould,
as a text book for the use of the higher schools and colleges, for
which, as the editor remarks, it is well adapted from its simplicity of
style, clearness of arrangement, and its important and comprehensive
range of subjects. In the present edition the woodcut illustrations have
been increased from 170 to 390, thereby adding greatly to the value of a
work which is well calculated to furnish the general reader with
trustworthy information upon the matter to which it relates.

BOOKS RECEIVED.--_The Literary and Scientific Register and Almanac for
1852_, edited by J. W. G. Gutch, puts forth this--its eleventh
appearance--with increased claims to public favour in the shape of many
important additions and improvements, in the great mass of condensed
information which it contains. _The Orations of M. T. Cicero literally
translated by_ C. D. Yonge, B.A. _Vol. I. containing the Orations for
Quintius, Sextus Roscius, Quintus Roscius, against Quintius Cæcilius and
against Verres_, is the new volume of Bohn's _Classical Library_. The
fifth volume of _Neander's General History of the Christian Religion and
Church_ (of the value of which we have already spoken) forms the new
issue of the same enterprising publisher's _Standard Library_.


BOOKS AND ODD VOLUMES

WANTED TO PURCHASE.

A SERMON preached at Fulham in 1810 by the REV. JOHN OWEN of Paglesham,
on the death of Mrs. Prowse, Wicken Park, Northamptonshire (Hatchard).

FÜSSLEIN, JOH. CONRAD, BEYTRÄGE ZUR ERLÄUTERUNG DER
KIRCHEN-REFORMATIONS-GESCHICHTE DES SCHWEITZERLANDES. 5 Vols. Zurich,
1741.

  [Star symbol] Letters, stating particulars and lowest price,
  _carriage free_, to be sent to MR. BELL, Publisher of "NOTES AND
  QUERIES," 186. Fleet Street.


Notices to Correspondents.

PERMANENT ENLARGEMENT OF "NOTES AND QUERIES."--_In compliance with the
suggestion of many of our correspondents, and for the purpose of giving
more ready insertion to the Replies which we receive to their Queries,
we propose to enlarge our Paper permanently to 24 pages; making it 32
pages when occasion requires. This change, called for moreover by the
increase of our correspondence consequent on our increased circulation,
will take place on_ SATURDAY NEXT, _the 3rd of January, when we shall
commence our_ Fifth Volume. _From that day the price of our paper will
be 4d. for the unstamped, and 5d. for stamped copies. By this
arrangement we shall render unnecessary the double or Sixpenny Numbers
now issued nearly every month; thus avoiding a good deal of occasional
confusion, and rendering the price of the enlarged_ "NOTES AND QUERIES"
_for the whole year very little more than it is at present._

CAN. EBOR. _shall have early attention._

THE REV. JAMES GRAVES _requests us to express his obligations to_ MR.
D'ALTON _for information respecting the Hothams, from the collections_
MR. D'ALTON _has made for illustrating the history of nearly 3,000
families._

THEOPHYLACT. _How can we address a letter to this correspondent?_

S. WMSON. _The passages referred to are not in_ Richard the Third _as
written by Shakspeare, but in Cibber's adaptation of that play._

GRIMALDI'S ORIGINES GENEALOGICÆ. _A copy of this in good condition may
be had of our Publisher._

REPLIES RECEIVED.--_Tregonwell Frampton--Wady Mokatteb--General
Wolfe--Alterius Orbis Papa--Three Estates of the Realm--Mirabilis
Liber--There is no Mistake--Lines on the Bible--Passage in
Goldsmith--Suicides buried in Cross Roads--Biographical Dictionary--Hell
paved, &c.--The Broad Arrow--Nelson's Signal--Roman Index
Expurgatorius--Bogatzky's Golden Treasury--Christianity in the
Orkneys--Nolo Episcopari--Abigail--Cimmerii--Catterick for
Cattraeth--Cockney--Verses in Latin Prose Writers--Dial at
Karlsbad--Marshal's Distribution of Hours--Notes on Virgil--Quaker
Bible._

_Errata._--Page 437, col. 2. l. 32. for "the signatures run to _pages_
in eights," read "the signatures run to Pp. in eights;" p. 487, col. 1.
l. 7 from bottom, for "MAGISTVM," read "MAGIST_R_VM."




BEAUTIFUL CHRISTMAS and NEW-YEAR'S GIFT. The "Art-Journal Illustrated
Catalogue" (price One Guinea) is recommended as a peculiarly appropriate
Gift Book for the Christmas of 1851. "It is at once interesting, useful,
and beautiful;" "a valuable reminder of the Exhibition to those by whom
it was visited, and equally valuable to those to whom the enjoyment was
denied;" "a beautiful book for the drawing-room;" and "a useful
instructor for all classes." This volume may still be obtained of any
bookseller; but it will soon be out of print.

  GEORGE VIRTUE, Publisher, 25. Paternoster Row.


KIDD'S

  LONDON JOURNAL.

  On January 3rd, price 1-1/2_d._ Weekly; also in Monthly Parts,
  price 7_d._

    "From a detailed Prospectus, just issued, we learn that Mr. Kidd,
    the Naturalist, of Hammersmith, is about to produce a New cheap
    Weekly Paper of his own; and he has chosen the first day of the
    new year to mark its advent among his many friends and
    enthusiastic supporters. As we have presented our readers from
    week to week with numerous Extracts from his Writings in the
    'Gardener's Chronicle,' on Nightingales, Black-caps, Canaries, &c.
    &c. and also from his masterly 'Essays on Instinct and Reason in
    Animals,' we need make no comment on the anticipated treat. Mr.
    Kidd's peculiarly pleasing and graphic style of writing, and his
    keen observation of passing events, have long since proved him to
    be an 'able general' in catering for the public appetite, which
    'grows by what it feeds on.' He has our best wishes for his
    success."--_Sun_, Dec. 23.

  London: GEORGE BERGER, Holywell Street, Strand; and by order of
  all Booksellers and Newsvendors.


NEW DEVOTIONAL COMMENTARY ON THE APOCALYPSE.

  In small 8vo. price 8_s._ 6_d._

  THE APOCALYPSE; with NOTES AND REFLECTIONS.

  LEADING CONTENTS: 1. The Great High Priest; or, Christ's Presence
  in his Church.--2. The Sealed Book; or, Prophetic History of the
  Church.--3. The Book eaten by St. John; or, Mysteries of the
  Church.--4. The Vials; or, Judgments of God.--5. The Vision of
  Babylon; or, the Unfaithful Church.--6. Scenes in Heaven; or,
  Christ with his Elect.--7. The Heavenly Jerusalem; or, the Church
  Triumphant.

  By the Rev. ISAAC WILLIAMS, B.D., late Fellow of Trinity College,
  Oxford.

  RIVINGTONS, St. Paul's Church Yard, and Waterloo Place.


ARNOLD'S SCHOOL CLASSICS.

  In 12mo. price 4_s._

  SOPHOCLIS OEDIPUS TYRANNUS. With English Notes, from Schneidewin,
  translated from the German by the Rev. HENRY BROWNE, M.A.,
  Prebendary of Chichester.

  RIVINGTONS, St. Paul's Church Yard, and Waterloo Place;

  Of whom may be had, edited by the Rev. T. K. ARNOLD, with English
  Notes (uniformly printed),

  1. THE AJAX OF SOPHOCLES, 3_s._--2. THE PHILOCTETES, 3_s._--3.
  ÆSCHINES' ORATION against CTESIPHON, 4_s._--4. THUCYDIDES, Book
  I., 5_s._ 6_d._


RARE BOOKS.--Just Published, G. GANCIA'S CATALOGUE of one of the finest
and most important Collections of RARE BOOKS ever offered to Amateurs by
any Bookseller. It consists of about 5,000 Works: 200 vols. Black
Letter, fine Manuscripts, Block Books, Books printed upon Vellum, Romans
de Chevalerie, Early Poetry, Novellieri, Faceties, Mysteries, the rarest
Aldines and Elzevirs, Chronicles, Early Travels, Languages of South
America, Books on Hunting, Cookery, &c., First Editions of the most
important Works in Italian, French, Spanish, Greek, and Latin Authors,
&c. Nearly two thousand volumes have been bound by Bauzonnet, Niedrée,
Capé, Dura, Lortic, Bedford, Clarke, and Hayday, at the cost of from
15_s._ to 15_l._ per volume.--Will be sent to Amateurs, on forwarding
Twelve Postage Stamps to G. GANCIA, 73. King's Road, Brighton.

  MACARONEANA; ou, Histoire de la Poésie Macaronique chez tous les
  Peuples: avec Extraits, Notices, &c. Par M. OCTAVE DELEPIERRE, et
  publiée aux frais de G. GANCIA. 1 vol. 8vo. price 8_s._ or by
  post, 9_s._ Only a small number of copies having been printed,
  early application must be made to G. GANCIA. This very important
  and interesting work will have its place in every Library.


The following all in post 8vo.

      GLOSSARY OF WORDS USED IN BERKSHIRE. 1_s._ 6_d._
      GLOSSARY OF CUMBERLAND WORDS. 1_s._ 6_d._
      GLOSSARY OF ESSEX WORDS. 1_s._ 6_d._
      GLOSSARY OF DORSETSHIRE WORDS. 1_s._
      GLOSSARY OF GLOUCESTERSHIRE WORDS. 1_s._ 6_d._
      TOPOGRAPHICAL NOTES ON BATH, GLASTONBURY, TAUNTON, &c. By DEAN MILLES. 1_s._

  London: JOHN GRAY BELL, Bedford Street, Covent Garden.


WESTERN LIFE ASSURANCE AND

      ANNUITY SOCIETY,

  3. PARLIAMENT STREET, LONDON.

  Founded A.D. 1812.

  _Directors._

      H. Edgeworth Bicknell, Esq.
      William Cabell, Esq.
      T. Somers Cocks, Jun. Esq. M.P.
      G. Henry Drew, Esq.
      William Evans, Esq.
      William Freeman, Esq.
      F. Fuller, Esq.
      J. Henry Goodhart, Esq.
      T. Grissell, Esq.
      James Hunt, Esq.
      J. Arscott Lethbridge, Esq.
      E. Lucas, Esq.
      James Lys Seager, Esq.
      J. Basley White, Esq.
      Joseph Carter Wood, Esq.

  _Trustees._

      W. Whateley, Esq., Q.C.
      L. C. Humfrey, Esq., Q.C.
      George Drew, Esq.

  _Consulting Counsel._--Sir William P. Wood, M.P.,
  Solicitor-General.

  _Physician._--William Rich. Basham, M.D.

  _Bankers._--Messrs. Cocks, Biddulph, and Co., Charing Cross.

  VALUABLE PRIVILEGE.

  POLICIES effected in this Office do not become void through
  temporary difficulty in paying a Premium, as permission is given
  upon application to suspend the payment at interest, according to
  the conditions detailed in the Prospectus.

  Specimens of Rates of Premium for Assuring 100_l._, with a Share
  in three-fourths of the Profits:--

      Age.  £   _s._ _d._

      17    1    14    4
      22    1    18    8
      27    2     4    5
      32    2    10    8
      37    2    18    6
      42    3     8    2

  ARTHUR SCRATCHLEY, M.A., F.R.A.S., Actuary.

  Now ready, price 10_s._ 6_d._, Second Edition, with material
  additions, INDUSTRIAL INVESTMENT and EMIGRATION; being a TREATISE
  on BENEFIT BUILDING SOCIETIES, and on the General Principles of
  Land Investment, exemplified in the Cases of Freehold Land
  Societies, Building Companies, &c. With a Mathematical Appendix on
  Compound Interest and Life Assurance. By ARTHUR SCRATCHLEY, M.A.,
  Actuary to the Western Life Assurance Society, 3. Parliament
  Street, London.


SPECIAL NOTICE TO INTENDING ASSURERS.

  Intending Life Assurers are respectfully invited to compare the
  principles, rates, and whole provisions of the

  SCOTTISH PROVIDENT INSTITUTION

  with those of any existing company.

  In this Society the whole profits are divisible among the
  policy-holders, who are at the same time exempt from personal
  liability. It claims superiority, however, over other mutual
  offices in the following particulars.

  1. Premium at early and middle ages about a fourth lower. See
  specimens below.

  2. A more accurate adjustment of the rates of premium to the
  several ages.

  3. A principle in the division of the surplus more safe,
  equitable, and favourable to good lives.

  4. Exemption from entry money.

  Annual Premiums for 100_l._, with Whole Profits.

      -------+--------+-------+--------+--------+-------+-------+-------
      Age 20 |   25   |   30  |   35   |   40   |   45  |   50  |   55
      -------+--------+-------+--------+--------+-------+-------+-------
      1 15 8 | 1 18 0 | 2 1 6 | 2 6 10 | 2 14 9 | 3 4 9 | 4 1 7 | 5 1 11
      -------+--------+-------+--------+--------+-------+-------+-------

  [Annual Premiums for 100_l._, with Whole Profits, payable for 21
  years only.]

      -------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------
       Age 20|   25   |   30   |   35   |   40   |   45   |   50
      -------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------
      2  7  0| 2 10  8| 2 14  6| 2 19  8| 3  6  4| 3 14  9| 4  7  2
      -------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------+--------

  All policies indisputable unless obtained by fraud.

  Forms of proposal, prospectus containing full tables, copies of
  the Twelfth Annual Report, and every information, will be
  forwarded (gratis) on application at the London Office, 12.
  Moorgate Street.

  GEORGE GRANT, Agent for London.


THE BEST IS THE CHEAPEST.

      The Best Congou Tea             3_s._ 8_d._ per lb.
      The Best Souchong Tea           4_s._ 4_d._     "
      The Best Gunpowder Tea          5_s._ 8_d._     "
      The Best Old Mocha Coffee       1_s._ 4_d._     "
      The Best West India Coffee      1_s._ 4_d._     "
      The Fine True Ripe Rich
          Rare Souchong Tea           4_s._ 8_d._     "

  40_s._ worth or upwards sent CARRIAGE FREE to any part of England by

  PHILLIPS & CO., TEA MERCHANTS, No. 8. King William Street, City,
  London.


THE LITERARY GAZETTE,

  ENLARGED TO TWENTY-FOUR PAGES.

  THE LITERARY GAZETTE, price 4_d._ (stamped to go free by post
  5_d._), is published every Saturday in time for despatch by the
  Morning Mails. The contents of THE LITERARY GAZETTE are arranged
  as follows:--

  =Reviews.=--Critical Reviews, with extracts of all important new
  English Works, and occasionally of Foreign Works.

  =Notices.=--Brief Critical and Analytical Notices of New Books, not
  suitable for review.

  =Summary.=--Announcements of Forthcoming Works, with notices of New
  Editions, Reprints, Translations, Periodicals, and Pamphlets.

  =List of New Books.=--The usual List, with particulars of size, and
  price of all books published during the week.

  =Communications.=--Original Memoirs, Biographies, Accounts of
  Scientific Voyages and Travels, Letters from Correspondents, &c.

  =Topics of the Week.=--An editorial record of literary, scientific,
  and social intelligence.

  =Proceedings of Societies.=--Abstracts of original Lectures, and of
  Papers read at the Learned Societies, with occasional illustrative
  Woodcuts of Diagrams, Sections, &c.

  =Fine Arts.=--Reviews and Notices of Art Publications, Prints,
  Exhibitions, Sales of Pictures, &c., and general art intelligence.

  =Foreign Correspondence.=--Letters from Correspondents resident in
  Paris, Leipsic, Madrid, and other continental cities.

  =Music.=--Notices of Operas, Concerts, Oratorios, New Publications,
  and general musical intelligence.

  =The Drama.=--Reports of the Theatres, with Criticisms of New Plays,
  and general dramatic intelligence.

  =Varieties.=--Fragments of general interest.

  Subscribers ordering the stamped edition have their copies
  forwarded direct from the office, free of postage, by the early
  mail on the morning of publication.

  THE LITERARY GAZETTE is re-issued in Monthly Parts, and may be
  had, _free of expense_, in all parts of the country with the
  Magazines.

  London: REEVE & BENHAM, 5. Henrietta Street, Covent Garden.


NEW GIFT-BOOK FOR THE SEASON.

  Just published, crown 8vo., price 16_s._ elegantly bound.

  THE LANSDOWNE SHAKESPEARE. This beautiful One-volume Edition of
  the Englishman's household book, perfectly unique in the annals of
  printing, and dedicated, by express permission, to the Most Noble
  the Marquis of Lansdowne, is now ready.

  It has been produced, regardless of cost, in order that it may
  take a permanent position as a gentleman's hand-book abroad and a
  drawing-room bijou at home. Its characteristics will be found in
  uniting with its portability a clearness and facility in reading
  hitherto unattained in any edition, the text being from the latest
  and best Authorities; and, for the first time in any edition of
  Shakespeare, the names of the characters are placed in the centre
  of the page, unabridged, on the plan adopted in the plays of
  Molière, Racine, Corneille, Goethe, and Schiller; and which
  arrangement has been still further greatly improved by printing
  them, and also the whole of the Stage Directions, in red ink, the
  text being in black; thus rendering the pages of Shakespeare as
  pleasant and easy to read as a Novel by Scott, and for facility of
  reference unequalled.

  To Printers this volume will appear extraordinary for its
  cheapness and the great care required in its production, nearly
  1,200 pages, of a minute character, being printed in different
  coloured inks.

  A magnificent Portrait has been engraved for this Edition, by H.
  ROBINSON, in Line, after Droeshout's Engraving to the first folio,
  and of which a few impressions have been taken on large paper
  separately. These may be had Proofs, 5_s._; Prints, 3_s._ each.

  Publisher: WILLIAM WHITE, Pall Mall.


GUTCH'S SCIENTIFIC POCKET-BOOK.

  Now ready, price 3_s._ 6_d._ roan tuck.

  LITERARY AND SCIENTIFIC REGISTER and ALMANACK for 1852: with an
  ample Collection of useful Statistical and Miscellaneous Tables.
  Dedicated, by special permission, to Prince Albert. By J. W. G.
  GUTCH, M.R.C.S.L., F.L.S., Foreign Service Queen's Messenger.

  "The contents are so condensed and arranged that it supplies
  without much trouble to the reader what he must, without it,
  search for through many heavy publications."--_Times_, Dec. 4,
  1851.

  D. BOGUE, 86. Fleet Street; and all Booksellers.


THE QUARTERLY REVIEW, No. CLXXIX., will be published NEXT WEEK.

  CONTENTS:

         I. RUSSIAN AND GERMAN CAMPAIGNS.
        II. KEW GARDENS.
       III. PHYSIOGNOMY.
        IV. JUNIUS.
         V. HIGHLAND DESTITUTION AND IRISH EMIGRATION.
        VI. SIR ROBERT HERON'S NOTES.
       VII. ITALY.
      VIII. LOUIS NAPOLEON BUONAPARTE.

      JOHN MURRAY, Albemarle Street.


This day is published, neatly bound in cloth, gilt edges, 4_s._ 6_d._

      THE MOTHER'S LEGACIE
      TO HER
      UNBORNE CHILDE.

  BY ELIZABETH JOCELINE.

  Reprinted from the Edition of 1625, with a Biographical and
  Historical Introduction.

  WILLIAM BLACKWOOD & SONS, Edinburgh and London.


Just published, 8vo. cloth, pp. 240, price 10_s._ 6_d._ handsomely
printed on fine paper at the Dublin University Press,

  THE UNRIPE WINDFALLS IN PROSE AND VERSE of JAMES HENRY, M.D.

  CONTENTS: Miscellaneous Poems; Criticism on the style of Lord
  Byron, in a Letter to the Editor of "NOTES AND QUERIES;" Specimen
  of Virgilian Commentaries; Specimen of a New Metrical Translation
  of Eneis.

  London: GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street.




Printed by THOMAS CLARK SHAW, of No. 8. New Street Square, at No. 5. New
Street Square, in the Parish of St. Bride, in the City of London, and
published by GEORGE BELL, of No. 186. Fleet Street, in the Parish of St.
Dunstan in the West, in the City of London, Publisher, at No. 186. Fleet
Street aforesaid.--Saturday, December 27, 1851.




      [List of volumes and pages in "Notes and Queries", Vol. I-IV]

      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. I.                                   |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol., No.     | Date, Year        | Pages     | PG # xxxxx  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No.  1 | November  3, 1849 |   1 -  17 | PG #  8603  |
      | Vol. I No.  2 | November 10, 1849 |  18 -  32 | PG # 11265  |
      | Vol. I No.  3 | November 17, 1849 |  33 -  46 | PG # 11577  |
      | Vol. I No.  4 | November 24, 1849 |  49 -  63 | PG # 13513  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No.  5 | December  1, 1849 |  65 -  80 | PG # 11636  |
      | Vol. I No.  6 | December  8, 1849 |  81 -  95 | PG # 13550  |
      | Vol. I No.  7 | December 15, 1849 |  97 - 112 | PG # 11651  |
      | Vol. I No.  8 | December 22, 1849 | 113 - 128 | PG # 11652  |
      | Vol. I No.  9 | December 29, 1849 | 130 - 144 | PG # 13521  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 10 | January   5, 1850 | 145 - 160 | PG #        |
      | Vol. I No. 11 | January  12, 1850 | 161 - 176 | PG # 11653  |
      | Vol. I No. 12 | January  19, 1850 | 177 - 192 | PG # 11575  |
      | Vol. I No. 13 | January  26, 1850 | 193 - 208 | PG # 11707  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 14 | February  2, 1850 | 209 - 224 | PG # 13558  |
      | Vol. I No. 15 | February  9, 1850 | 225 - 238 | PG # 11929  |
      | Vol. I No. 16 | February 16, 1850 | 241 - 256 | PG # 16193  |
      | Vol. I No. 17 | February 23, 1850 | 257 - 271 | PG # 12018  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 18 | March     2, 1850 | 273 - 288 | PG # 13544  |
      | Vol. I No. 19 | March     9, 1850 | 289 - 309 | PG # 13638  |
      | Vol. I No. 20 | March    16, 1850 | 313 - 328 | PG # 16409  |
      | Vol. I No. 21 | March    23, 1850 | 329 - 343 | PG # 11958  |
      | Vol. I No. 22 | March    30, 1850 | 345 - 359 | PG # 12198  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 23 | April     6, 1850 | 361 - 376 | PG # 12505  |
      | Vol. I No. 24 | April    13, 1850 | 377 - 392 | PG # 13925  |
      | Vol. I No. 25 | April    20, 1850 | 393 - 408 | PG # 13747  |
      | Vol. I No. 26 | April    27, 1850 | 409 - 423 | PG # 13822  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 27 | May       4, 1850 | 425 - 447 | PG # 13712  |
      | Vol. I No. 28 | May      11, 1850 | 449 - 463 | PG # 13684  |
      | Vol. I No. 29 | May      18, 1850 | 465 - 479 | PG # 15197  |
      | Vol. I No. 30 | May      25, 1850 | 481 - 495 | PG # 13713  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. II.                                  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol., No.      | Date, Year         | Pages   | PG # xxxxx  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 31 | June  1, 1850      |   1- 15 | PG # 12589  |
      | Vol. II No. 32 | June  8, 1850      |  17- 32 | PG # 15996  |
      | Vol. II No. 33 | June 15, 1850      |  33- 48 | PG # 26121  |
      | Vol. II No. 34 | June 22, 1850      |  49- 64 | PG # 22127  |
      | Vol. II No. 35 | June 29, 1850      |  65- 79 | PG # 22126  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 36 | July  6, 1850      |  81- 96 | PG # 13361  |
      | Vol. II No. 37 | July 13, 1850      |  97-112 | PG # 13729  |
      | Vol. II No. 38 | July 20, 1850      | 113-128 | PG # 13362  |
      | Vol. II No. 39 | July 27, 1850      | 129-143 | PG # 13736  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 40 | August  3, 1850    | 145-159 | PG # 13389  |
      | Vol. II No. 41 | August 10, 1850    | 161-176 | PG # 13393  |
      | Vol. II No. 42 | August 17, 1850    | 177-191 | PG # 13411  |
      | Vol. II No. 43 | August 24, 1850    | 193-207 | PG # 13406  |
      | Vol. II No. 44 | August 31, 1850    | 209-223 | PG # 13426  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 45 | September  7, 1850 | 225-240 | PG # 13427  |
      | Vol. II No. 46 | September 14, 1850 | 241-256 | PG # 13462  |
      | Vol. II No. 47 | September 21, 1850 | 257-272 | PG # 13936  |
      | Vol. II No. 48 | September 28, 1850 | 273-288 | PG # 13463  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 49 | October  5, 1850   | 289-304 | PG # 13480  |
      | Vol. II No. 50 | October 12, 1850   | 305-320 | PG # 13551  |
      | Vol. II No. 51 | October 19, 1850   | 321-351 | PG # 15232  |
      | Vol. II No. 52 | October 26, 1850   | 353-367 | PG # 22624  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 53 | November  2, 1850  | 369-383 | PG # 13540  |
      | Vol. II No. 54 | November  9, 1850  | 385-399 | PG # 22138  |
      | Vol. II No. 55 | November 16, 1850  | 401-415 | PG # 15216  |
      | Vol. II No. 56 | November 23, 1850  | 417-431 | PG # 15354  |
      | Vol. II No. 57 | November 30, 1850  | 433-454 | PG # 15405  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 58 | December  7, 1850  | 457-470 | PG # 21503  |
      | Vol. II No. 59 | December 14, 1850  | 473-486 | PG # 15427  |
      | Vol. II No. 60 | December 21, 1850  | 489-502 | PG # 24803  |
      | Vol. II No. 61 | December 28, 1850  | 505-524 | PG # 16404  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. III.                                 |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol., No.       | Date, Year        | Pages   | PG # xxxxx  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 62 | January  4, 1851  |   1- 15 | PG # 15638  |
      | Vol. III No. 63 | January 11, 1851  |  17- 31 | PG # 15639  |
      | Vol. III No. 64 | January 18, 1851  |  33- 47 | PG # 15640  |
      | Vol. III No. 65 | January 25, 1851  |  49- 78 | PG # 15641  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 66 | February  1, 1851 |  81- 95 | PG # 22339  |
      | Vol. III No. 67 | February  8, 1851 |  97-111 | PG # 22625  |
      | Vol. III No. 68 | February 15, 1851 | 113-127 | PG # 22639  |
      | Vol. III No. 69 | February 22, 1851 | 129-159 | PG # 23027  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 70 | March  1, 1851    | 161-174 | PG # 23204  |
      | Vol. III No. 71 | March  8, 1851    | 177-200 | PG # 23205  |
      | Vol. III No. 72 | March 15, 1851    | 201-215 | PG # 23212  |
      | Vol. III No. 73 | March 22, 1851    | 217-231 | PG # 23225  |
      | Vol. III No. 74 | March 29, 1851    | 233-255 | PG # 23282  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 75 | April  5, 1851    | 257-271 | PG # 23402  |
      | Vol. III No. 76 | April 12, 1851    | 273-294 | PG # 26896  |
      | Vol. III No. 77 | April 19, 1851    | 297-311 | PG # 26897  |
      | Vol. III No. 78 | April 26, 1851    | 313-342 | PG # 26898  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 79 | May  3, 1851      | 345-359 | PG # 26899  |
      | Vol. III No. 80 | May 10, 1851      | 361-382 | PG # 32495  |
      | Vol. III No. 81 | May 17, 1851      | 385-399 | PG # 29318  |
      | Vol. III No. 82 | May 24, 1851      | 401-415 | PG # 28311  |
      | Vol. III No. 83 | May 31, 1851      | 417-440 | PG # 36835  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 84 | June  7, 1851     | 441-472 | PG # 37379  |
      | Vol. III No. 85 | June 14, 1851     | 473-488 | PG # 37403  |
      | Vol. III No. 86 | June 21, 1851     | 489-511 | PG # 37496  |
      | Vol. III No. 87 | June 28, 1851     | 513-528 | PG # 37516  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. IV.                                  |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol., No.       | Date, Year         | Pages   | PG # xxxxx |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No. 88  | July  5, 1851      |   1- 15 | PG # 37548 |
      | Vol. IV No. 89  | July 12, 1851      |  17- 31 | PG # 37568 |
      | Vol. IV No. 90  | July 19, 1851      |  33- 47 | PG # 37593 |
      | Vol. IV No. 91  | July 26, 1851      |  49- 79 | PG # 37778 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No. 92  | August  2, 1851    |  81- 94 | PG # 38324 |
      | Vol. IV No. 93  | August  9, 1851    |  97-112 | PG # 38337 |
      | Vol. IV No. 94  | August 16, 1851    | 113-127 | PG # 38350 |
      | Vol. IV No. 95  | August 23, 1851    | 129-144 | PG # 38386 |
      | Vol. IV No. 96  | August 30, 1851    | 145-167 | PG # 38405 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No.  97 | Sept.  6, 1851     | 169-183 | PG # 38433 |
      | Vol. IV No.  98 | Sept. 13, 1851     | 185-200 | PG # 38491 |
      | Vol. IV No.  99 | Sept. 20, 1851     | 201-216 | PG # 38574 |
      | Vol. IV No. 100 | Sept. 27, 1851     | 217-246 | PG # 38656 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No. 101 | Oct.  4, 1851      | 249-264 | PG # 38701 |
      | Vol. IV No. 102 | Oct. 11, 1851      | 265-287 | PG # 38773 |
      | Vol. IV No. 103 | Oct. 18, 1851      | 289-303 | PG # 38864 |
      | Vol. IV No. 104 | Oct. 25, 1851      | 305-333 | PG # 38926 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No. 105 | Nov.  1, 1851      | 337-358 | PG # 39076 |
      | Vol. IV No. 106 | Nov.  8, 1851      | 361-374 | PG # 39091 |
      | Vol. IV No. 107 | Nov. 15, 1851      | 377-396 | PG # 39135 |
      | Vol. IV No. 108 | Nov. 22, 1851      | 401-414 | PG # 39197 |
      | Vol. IV No. 109 | Nov. 29, 1851      | 417-430 | PG # 39233 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No. 110 | Dec.  6, 1851      | 433-460 | PG # 39338 |
      | Vol. IV No. 111 | Dec. 13, 1851      | 465-478 | PG # 39393 |
      | Vol. IV No. 112 | Dec. 20, 1851      | 481-494 | PG # 39438 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol I. Index. [Nov. 1849-May 1850]             | PG # 13536 |
      | INDEX TO THE SECOND VOLUME. MAY-DEC., 1850     | PG # 13571 |
      | INDEX TO THE THIRD VOLUME. JAN.-JUNE, 1851     | PG # 26770 |
      +------------------------------------------------+------------+





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes and Queries, Vol. IV, Number
113, December 27, 1851, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES AND QUERIES, DEC 27, 1851 ***

***** This file should be named 39503-0.txt or 39503-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/5/0/39503/

Produced by Charlene Taylor, Jonathan Ingram and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Library of Early Journals.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
