The Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes and Queries, Vol. V, Number 115,
January 10, 1852, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Notes and Queries, Vol. V, Number 115, January 10, 1852
       A Medium of Inter-communication for Literary Men, Artists,
       Antiquaries, Genealogists, etc.

Author: Various

Editor: George Bell

Release Date: August 25, 2012 [EBook #40582]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES AND QUERIES, JAN 10, 1852 ***




Produced by Charlene Taylor, Jonathan Ingram and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Library of Early Journals.)





[Transcriber's note: Original spelling variations have not been
standardized. Some Arabic, Coptic, Hebrew or Persian words could not
be shown in an adequate way in this version. _Underscores_ have been
used to indicate _italic_ fonts; +plus+ signs indicate +bold+ fonts.
A list of volumes and pages in "Notes and Queries" has been added at
the end.]




NOTES AND QUERIES:

A MEDIUM OF INTER-COMMUNICATION

FOR

LITERARY MEN, ARTISTS, ANTIQUARIES, GENEALOGISTS, ETC.

"When found, make a note of."--CAPTAIN CUTTLE.

VOL. V.-No. 115. SATURDAY, JANUARY 10. 1852.

Price Fourpence. Stamped Edition, 5_d._




CONTENTS.

                                                                Page


      NOTES:--

      Cibber's Lives of the Poets, by James Crossley              25

      Job, by the Rev. T. R. Browne                               26

      A New Zealand Legend                                        27

      Minor Notes:--A Dutch Commentary on Pope--Satirical
      Verses on the Chancellor Clarendon's Downfall--Execution
      of Charles I.--Born within the Sound of
      Bow Bell                                                    27

      QUERIES:--

      Are our Lists of English Sovereigns complete?               28

      Minor Queries:--Marriage Tithe in Wales--"Preached
      in a Pulpit rather than a Tub"--Lord Wharton's
      Bibles--Reed Family--Slavery in Scotland--Leslie,
      Bishop of Down--Chaplains to the Forces--John of
      Horsill--St. Crispin's Day--Poniatowski Gems--Why
      Cold Pudding settles one's Love?                            29

      Minor Queries Answered:--Poem by Camden--Marches
      of Wales and Lords Marchers                                 30

      REPLIES:--

      Moravian Hymns                                              30

      Wady Mokatteb not mentioned in Num. xi. 26., by
      the Rev. Dr. Todd, &c.                                      31

      Boiling to Death as a Punishment, by J. B. Coleman          32

      The Roman Index Expurgatorius of 1607                       33

      Hobbes's "Leviathan"                                        34

      Major-Gen. James Wolfe, by Lord Braybrooke, Rev. M.
      Walcott, &c.                                                34

      "There is no mistake," by C. Ross                           35

      The Rev. Mr. Gay, by Edward Tagart                          36

      Parish Registers, Right of Search, by
      John Nurse Chadwick                                         36

      Replies to Minor Queries:--Proverbs--Infantry
      Firing--Joceline's Legacy--Winifreda; Stevens'
      "Rural Felicity"--"Posie of other Men's Flowers"--Abigail
      --Legend of St. Molaisse--Collars of SS.--Pronunciation
      of Coke--Use of Misereres--Inscription on a Pair
      of Spectacles--John Lord Frescheville--Nightingale
      and Thorn--Godfrey Higgins's Works--Ancient Egypt--Crosses
      and Crucifixes--Rotten Row--Borough-English--Tonge
      of Tonge--Queen Brunéhaut--"Essex Broad Oak"--Frozen
      Sounds and Sir John Mandeville, &c.                         37

      MISCELLANEOUS:--

      Notes on Books, Sales, Catalogues, &c.                      44

      Books and Odd Volumes wanted                                45

      Notices to Correspondents                                   45

      Advertisements                                              45




Notes.


CIBBER'S LIVES OF THE POETS.

It is rather extraordinary that none of Dr. Johnson's biographers appear
to have been aware that the prospectus of Cibber's _Lives_ was furnished
by Johnson. In Mr. Croker's last edition of _Boswell_ there is a long
note (see Edit. 1848, p. 818.) on the claim of Theophilus Cibber to the
authorship of the _Lives_, or a participation in it: but though he
remarks that the plan on which these _Lives_ are written is
substantially the same as that which Johnson long after adopted in his
own work, his attention does not seem to have been directed to the
prospectus of Cibber's _Lives_. As, however, this prospectus was not
adopted as a preface to the work, but merely appeared in the newspapers
and periodicals of the day, it is the less surprising that it has
hitherto remained unnoticed. The internal evidence is decisive; and, as
it has never, that I am aware of, been reprinted, and is of great
interest in connexion with Johnson's own _Lives of the Poets_, of which
admirable work it may be considered to have "cast the shadows before,"
at the distance of nearly thirty years, I trust, though rather long, it
may claim insertion in "N. & Q." It is extracted from a London newspaper
of the 20th February, 1753.

    JAMES CROSSLEY.

  "This Day [20th Feb. 1753] is published,

  "In Twelves (Price Six pence),

  "NUMBER III. of

  "The LIVES of the POETS, of Great-Britain and Ireland, to the
  present Time.

  "Compiled from ample Materials scattered in a Variety of Books,
  and especially from the MS. Notes of the late ingenious Mr.
  COXETER, and others, collected for this Design.

  "By Mr. CIBBER.

  "Printed for R. Griffiths, at the Dunciad, in St. Paul's
  Church-yard.

  "Where may be had, No. I. and II.

  "This Work is published on the following Terms,

  "I. That it shall consist of Four neat Pocket Volumes, handsomely
  printed.

  "II. That it shall be published in Numbers, at Six-pence each,
  every Number containing Three Sheets, or Seventy-Two Pages; the
  Numbers to be printed every Saturday without Intermission, till
  the Whole is finished.

  "III. That Five Numbers shall make a Volume; so that the whole
  Work will not exceed the Price of Ten Shillings unbound.

  "To the Public.

  "The Professors of no Art have conferred more Honour on our Nation
  than the Poets. All Countries have been diligent in preserving the
  Memoirs of those who have, either by their Actions or Writings,
  drawn the Attention of the World upon them: it is a Tribute due to
  the illustrious Dead; and has a Tendency to awaken, in the Minds
  of the Living, the laudable Principle of Emulation. As there is no
  Reading at once so entertaining and instructive, as that of
  Biography, so none ought to have the Preference to it: It yields
  the most striking Pictures of Life, and shews us the many
  Vicissitudes to which we are exposed in the Course of that
  important Journey. It has happened that the Lives of the Literati
  have been less attended to than those of Men of Action, whether in
  the Field or Senate; possibly because Accounts of them are more
  difficult to be attained, as they move in a retired Sphere, and
  may therefore be thought incapable of exciting so much Curiosity,
  or affecting the Mind with equal Force; but certain it is, that
  familiar Life, the Knowledge of which is of the highest
  Importance, might often be strikingly exhibited, were its various
  Scenes but sufficiently known, and properly illustrated. Of this,
  the most affecting Instances will be found in the Lives of the
  Poets, whose Indigence has so often subjected them to experience
  Variety of Fortune, and whose Parts and Genius have been so much
  concerned in furnishing Entertainment to the Public. As the Poets
  generally converse more at large, than other men, their Lives must
  naturally be productive of such Incidents as cannot but please
  those who deem the Study of Human Nature, and Lessons of Life, the
  most important.

  "The Lives of the Poets have been less perfectly given to the
  World, than the Figure they have made in it, and the Share they
  have in our Admiration, naturally demand. The Dramatic Authors
  indeed have had some Writers who have transmitted Accounts of
  their works to Posterity: Of these Langbain is by far the most
  considerable. He was a Man of extensive Reading, and has taken a
  great deal of Pains to trace the Sources from which our Poets have
  derived their Plots; he has given a Catalogue of their Plays, and,
  as far as his Reading served him, very accurately: He has much
  improved upon Winstanley and Philips, and his Account of the Poets
  is certainly the best now extant. Jacob's Performance is a most
  contemptible one; he has given himself no Trouble to gain
  Intelligence, and has scarcely transcribed Langbain with Accuracy.
  Mrs. Cooper, Author of _The Muses Library_, has been industrious
  in collecting the Works and some Memoirs of the Poets who preceded
  Spenser: But her Plan did not admit of enlarging, and she has
  furnished but little Intelligence concerning them.

  "The general Error into which Langbain, Mrs. Cooper, and all the
  other Biographers have fallen, is this: They have considered the
  Poets merely as such, without tracing their Connexions in civil
  Life, the various Circumstances they have been in, their
  Patronage, their Employments, and in short, the Figure they made
  as Members of the Community; which Omission has rendered their
  Accounts less interesting; and while they have shewn us the Poet,
  they have quite neglected the Man. Many of the Poets, besides
  their Excellency in that Profession, were held in Esteem by Men in
  Power, and filled civil Employments with Honour and Reputation;
  various Particulars of their Lives are to be found in the Annals
  of the Age in which they lived, and which were connected with
  those of their Patron.

  "But these Particulars lie scattered in a Variety of Books, and
  the collecting them together and properly arranging them, is as
  yet unattempted, and is no easy task to accomplish. This however,
  we have endeavoured to do, and if we are able to execute our Plan,
  their Lives will prove entertaining, and many Articles of
  Intelligence, omitted by others, will be brought to Light. Another
  Advantage we imagine our Plan has over those who have gone before
  us in the same Attempt is, that we have not confined ourselves to
  Dramatic Writers only, but have taken in all who have had any Name
  as Poets, of whatsoever Class: and have besides given some Account
  of their other Writings: So that if they had any Excellence
  independant of Poetry, it will appear in full View to the Reader.
  We have likewise considered the Poets, not as they rise
  Alphabetically, but Chronologically, from Chaucer, the Morning
  Star of English Poetry, to the present Times: And we promise in
  the Course of this work, to make short Quotations by Way of
  Specimen from every Author, so that the Readers will be able to
  discern the Progress of Poetry from its Origin in Chaucer to its
  Consummation in Dryden. He will discover the gradual Improvements
  made in Versification, its Rise and Fall; and in a Word, the
  compleat History of Poetry will appear before him. In the Reign of
  Queen Elizabeth for Instance, Numbers and Harmony were carried to
  a great Perfection by the Earl of Surry, Spenser, and Fairfax; in
  the Reign of James and Charles the First, they grew harsher; at
  the Restoration, when Taste end Politeness began again to revive,
  Waller restored them to the Smoothness they had lost: Dryden
  reached the highest Excellence of Numbers, and compleated the
  Power of Poetry.

  "In the Course of this Work we shall be particular in quoting
  Authorities for every Fact advanced, as it is fit the Reader
  should not be left at an Uncertainty; and where we find judicious
  Criticisms on the Works of our Authors, we shall take care to
  insert them, and shall seldom give our Opinion in the Decision of
  what Degree of Merit is due to them. We may venture, however, in
  order to enliven the Narration as much as possible, sometimes to
  throw in a Reflection, and in Facts that are disputed, to sum up
  the Evidence on both Sides. But though the Poets were often
  involved in Parties, and engaged in the vicissitudes of State, we
  shall endeavour to illustrate their Conduct, without any satirical
  Remarks, or favourable Colouring; never detracting from the Merit
  of one, or raising the Reputation of another, on Account of
  political Principles."


JOB: HEBREW : בויא ARABIC : بويأ CUNEIFORM 'AIUB.'

  "This celebrated Patriarch has been represented by some sacred
  writers as imaginary, and his book as a fictitious dramatic
  composition."--_Dr. Hales:_ _See_ D'Oyly and Mant's _Bible_.

But Hales goes on to prove from the sacred writings that Job was a
_real_ character, and that his history is entitled to credit. That such
a person as Job _was_ a real character, and that he lived about the time
asserted of him, I am about to give a very remarkable proof, quite
independent of Scripture testimony.

In Kæmpfer's _Amoenitates Exoticæ_, there is a plate describing two
processions, one after the other: of the first but little mention is
made; of the second, the place from which the procession set out is not
mentioned, but the place of its final destination is Persepolis. It is
separated, in Kæmpfer, from the interpretation thereof, by a few leaves;
but as I have not his _Exoticæ_ by me, I cannot give an exact reference
as to pages; it will, however, be easily found, since the inscription
contains twenty-four lines, and the plate, I think, precedes it. It is
called "Inscriptio Persepolitana," and is evidently among the _most
ancient_ of Cuneiform inscriptions. As neither the inscription, nor the
word I am about to point out, could probably be inserted in the "N. &
Q.," I must be content to describe the word in the clearest manner
possible.

The lines, if I mistake not, measure about 5-¾ inches in length, and at
about 1-¼ inches from the beginning of the _second_ line (beginning at
the left hand, and measuring towards the right) is a word compounded of
four letters (five wedges), and reading _a i u b_. Take a wedge and form
them thus,--_sharp_ point to the _right_, near the top of the group, is
_a_; sharp point _downwards_ is _i_; sharp point to the left is _u_; the
two under wedges _joined_, viz. sharp point to the blunt part of the
second, is _b_.

It is remarkable that the Hebrew, Arabic, and Persian-Cuneiform should
have precisely the same letters for the name of Job. It may lead to some
conclusion with which I shall not meddle. See again D'Oyly and Mant, and
the comment of Bishop Sanderson in ch. i. v. 3., "and not improbably he
was a _king_."

Refer again to the plate, and behold him in _two_ places, _i.e._ in both
processions, _crowned_. And now examine the word following, _Aiub_; it
is compounded of four letters, _easily_ distinguishable. The first is a
T, scil. the Coptic [Coptic: T], the mystic cross, as may be shown in
the Chinese language; the second is _a_, compounded of the horizontal
wedge and the following perpendicular one; the third, or perpendicular
line, is _i_; and the last two, one under the other, is _j_, or the
Persian [Persian: i] or [Persian: j], _j_; making altogether [Persian:
taij] _taij_, _being crowned_. These two words, therefore, represent the
patriarch as being a king, "Aiub taij," "Job crowned."

    T. R. BROWNE.

  Southwick, near Oundle.


A NEW ZEALAND LEGEND.

The following legend was related to me by a gentleman when discoursing
upon the customs of the New Zealanders. It is their account of the
origin of their land, and illustrates the absurdities which they
believe.

"Old Morm (Query, rightly spelt) was a great fisherman, and being at one
time in want of fish-hooks, he quietly killed his two sons, and took
their jaw bones for hooks. As a requital to them for the loss of their
lives, he made the right eye of his eldest son the morning star, and the
right eye of his youngest son the evening star. One day he was sitting
on a rock fishing with one of the jawbones, when he hooked something
extraordinarily heavy,--whales were nothing to _him_. However, this
resisted all his endeavours, and at length he was obliged to resort to
other means to land this monster. He caught a dove, and tying the line
to its leg, he filled it with his spirit, and commanded it to fly
upwards. It did so, and without the least difficulty raised New Zealand!
Old Morm looked at this prodigy with wonder, but thinking it very pretty
he stepped ashore, where he saw men and fire. The first thing he did was
to burn his fingers, and then to cool them he jumped into the sea; when
the sulphur which arose from him was so great, that the Sulphur Island
was formed. After this things went on smoothly, till the New Zealanders
began to get refractory, and so offended the sun, that his majesty
refused to shine. So old Morm got up one day early and chased after the
sun, but it was not till after three days' hard hunting he managed to
catch him. A good deal of parleying then took place, and at last the sun
consented to shine for half the day only. Old Morm, to remedy this evil,
immediately made the moon, and tied it by a string to the sun, so that
when one went down it pulled the other up."

I did not hear on what authority this was given, but I dare say some of
your learned correspondents may have met with it, and will be kind
enough to give it, and say whether this fable was believed by _all_ the
tribes of New Zealand.

    UNICORN.


Minor Notes.

_A Dutch Commentary on Pope._--

      "As what a Dutchman plumps into the lakes,
      One circle first, and then a second makes."

      _Dunciad_, b. ii. 400.

  "It may be asked," said Bilderdyk in a note to his imitation of
  the _Essay on Man_[1], "why the little stone is thrown into the
  water by a Dutchman in particular. The reason is, that the Dutch
  sailors when lying idle in the Thames, often amuse themselves in
  calm weather by throwing little stones along the surface of the
  water, so as to make ducks and drakes, as it is called. This
  practice the English look at with great astonishment, and wonder
  at a use of the hands so different from that which they make of
  their own in boxing."

  [Footnote 1: De Mensch. Pope's _Essay on Man_ gevolgd door Mr. W.
  Bilderdyk. Amsterd. 1808.]

Bilderdyk speaks contemptuously of Pope: yet it may be surmised, from
the above commentary, that he was but ill qualified to criticise him,
otherwise he would not have supposed that "plump" could have the
remotest allusion to the light skimming amusement of "ducks and drakes;"
not to mention that he would have suspected that it was no "steentje"
that plumped into the lakes.

_Satirical Verses on the Chancellor Clarendon's Downfall._--In MS. Add.
4968., British Museum, a duodecimo volume containing a collection of
arms and achievements tricked by a painter-stainer in the reign of
Charles II., at fol. 62'o. is the following poem "On the Chancellor's
Downfall," which, if not already printed, may be worth preserving:--

      Pride, lust, ambitions, and the kingdom's hate,
      The Nation's broker, ruin of the State:
      Dunkirke's sad loss, divider of the fleet,
      Tangier's compounder for a barren sheet;
      The Shrub of Gentry married to the Crowne,
      And's daughter to the heir, is tumbled downe.
      The grand contemner of the Nobles lies
      Groveling in dust, as a just sacrifice,
      T'appease the injured King, abused Nation,--
      Who could beleeve this suddaine alteration!
      God is revenged to, for stones he tooke
      From aged Paules to build a house forth' Rooke.
      Goe on, great Prince, thy People doe rejoyce,
      Meethinks I heare the Nation's totall voyce
      Applauding this day's action to bee such,
      As rosting Rump, or beating of the Dutch.
      More cormorants of State as well as hee,
      Wee shortly hope in the same plight to see.
      Looke now upon thy withered Cavaliers,
      Who for reward hath nothing had but teres.
      Thankes to this Wiltshire hogge, son of ye spittle,
      Had they beene lookt on, hee had had but little.
      Breake up the coffers of this hording theefe,
      There monies will be found for there reliefe.
      I've said enough of lynsey woolsey hide,
      His sacriledge, ambition, lust, and pride.

    μ.

_Execution of Charles I._--In a letter which is preserved in the State
Paper Office, addressed to Secretary Bennet, by Lord Ormonde and the
Council of Ireland, and dated the 29th of April, 1663, their Lordships
request the Secretary to move his Majesty that "Henry Porter, then known
as Martial General Porter, standing charged as being the person by whose
hand the head of our late Sovereign King Charles the First, of blessed
memory, was cutt off, and now two years imprisoned in Dublin, should be
brought to trial in England."

    J. F. F.

  Dublin.

_Born within the Sound of Bow Bell._--In his edition of Stow's _Survey
of London_, Mr. Thoms appends the subjoined note to the account which is
given of Bow Church and its bells:--

  "From the absence of every allusion on the part of Stow to the
  common definition of a cockney, _a person born within the sound of
  Bow Bells_, the saying would appear to be of somewhat more recent
  date."

Stow's work was first published in 1598, and the author died in 1605.
Fuller, author of the _Worthies of England_, was born in 1608: and it
would seem that during his lifetime the definition of a cockney was
well-known; for thus does Fuller speak:--

  "[He was born within the sound of _Bow Bell_.] This is the
  periphrasis of a Londoner at large, born within the suburbs
  thereof; the sound of this bell exceeding the extent of the Lord
  Mayor's mace."

Can any correspondent of "N. & Q." refer me to an earlier writer than
Fuller for the same definition?

    ALFRED GATTY.




Queries.


ARE OUR LISTS OF ENGLISH SOVEREIGNS COMPLETE?

It must have often occurred to students of English history that the
current and usual lists of English sovereigns somewhat arbitrarily
reject all mention of some who, though for short periods, have enjoyed
the regal position and power in this country. There will at once occur
to every reader the names (first) of the Empress Maud, who, in a
charter, dated Oxford in 1141, styled herself "Matilda Imperatrix,
Henrici regis filia, et Anglorum Domina;" (secondly) the young King
Henry, the crowned son of Henry II.; and (thirdly) Lady Jane Grey, who,
in a few public and private documents, is cited as "Jane, Queen of
England, Domina Jana, Dei Gratia Angliæ, Franciæ et Hiberniæ Regina,"
&c.

I am desirous now of calling the attention of your historical readers to
the second case, my attention to the subject having been specially
directed thereto by recently consulting the _Chronicon Petroburgense_
(edited for the Camden Society by Mr. Stapleton), in which occur various
notices of Henry, the crowned son of Henry II., as Henry _III._ I beg to
quote these passages. Under the year MCLXIX. the chronicler records
that--

  "Hic fecit Henricus Rex coronare filium suum ab archiepiscopo
  Eborum."

Sir Harris Nicholas, in his _Chronology of History_, states that he was
crowned on Sunday the 14th June, 1170. Benedictus Albus Roger, of
Wendover (_Flowers of History_), says that "A.D. 1170, on the 13th of
July," the king's eldest son was crowned by Roger, Archbishop of York.

His wife Marguerite, of France, was also afterwards crowned in England,
in consequence of her father's complaint that she had not been included
in the former coronation of her husband, Henry the younger (Rex Henricus
junior), as he was commonly styled in this country; _li reys Josves_ in
the Norman language, and _lo reis Joves_ in the dialect of the southern
provinces of France. He himself afterwards assumed the title of _Henry
III._ regarding his father as virtually dead, owing to the fond, but
thoughtless, assertion of his indulgent sire, at the period of the son's
coronation, that "from that day forward the royalty ceased to belong to
him,"--"se regem non esse protestari." (_Vit. B. Thomæ_, lib. ii. cap.
31.)

The _Chronicon Petroburgense_, again, under the year 1183, records the
death of the younger king in these words, "Obiit Henricus tertius rex,
filius Henrici regis;" and afterwards notices the monarch usually styled
Henry _III._ as "Henricus rex iiiitus.," Henry _IV._ Sir Harris Nicholas
says, that Henry the younger is also "called by chroniclers Henry
_III._"

It is a curious point, because such a distinction must often surely have
been made in the days of the jointly reigning Henrys, and immediately
after that time. The father and son certainly seemed to have been
regarded as for years jointly reigning. For example, Roger of Wendover
records that, in 1175, William of Scotland declared himself the liegeman
of Henry, for the kingdom of Scotland and all his dominions, and did
homage and allegiance to him as his especial lord, "_and to Henry the
king's son_, saving his faith to his father." In the following year both
went through England, "promising justice to every one, both clergy and
laity, which promise they afterwards fully performed." (Roger of
Wendover.) Surely, then, for distinction sake, if not as a matter of
right and custom, the younger Henry should have been always styled Henry
III.; and if so, while he (not to mention the Empress Maud and Queen
Jane) shall remain excluded, therefore, may I not again with some show
of reason ask, are our lists of English sovereigns complete?

    J. J. S.

  The Cloisters, Temple.


Minor Queries.

_Marriage Tithe in Wales._--_Has Tithe of Marriage Goods_ (called in
Welsh "Degwm Priodas") been ever demanded or paid in _recent times_?
This appears to have often been the custom since the act of parliament
(about 1549) declaring such tithe to be illegal: but will the _custom_
of three centuries (if such a _custom_ has anywhere continued) confer a
right to this peculiar tithe, in spite of the act of parliament? What
was the nature of this tithe? and was it paid by either party in case of
widowhood?

    H. H. H. V.

"_Preached in a Pulpit rather than a Tub._"--The following couplet is
all that I remember of a poem which was the subject of a violent
newspaper controversy, I think about 1818. Can any one tell me where to
find the rest?

      "Preached in a pulpit rather than a tub,
      And gave no guinea to the Bible club."

    H. B. C.

  U. U. C.

_Lord Wharton's Bibles._--In some parishes there are given away, as a
reward for learning, certain Psalms and Prayers, Bibles bearing the
inscription "the gift of Philip Lord Wharton." How are these Bibles to
be obtained for any particular parish?

    SYLVA, M.A.

_Reed Family._--_In A Perfect Diurnall of some Passages in Parliament
and the dayly Proceedings of the Army under his Excellency the Lord
Fairfax_, _April 20, 1649_, No. 298., mention is made of one
_Lieut.-Col. John Reed_, governor, under Fairfax, of the town and county
of Poole, the first town making a public "demonstration of adhesion to
the present Parliament sitting at Westminster." A note by Sir James
Mackintosh, to whom this volume belonged, leads me to inquire whether
any of your readers can afford information as to the subsequent career
of this _John Reed_, and whether he can be identified by any local
history as connected with either the Dorset or Devon families of that
name.

    F. S. A.

  Paternoster Row.

_Slavery in Scotland._--In the Scottish Antiquarian Society's Museum in
Edinburgh there is a brass collar with the following inscription:

  "Alexander Stewart, found guilty of death for theft at Perth,
  December 5, 1701--gifted by the Justiciaries as a perpetual
  servant to Sir John Areskine of Aloa."

When was this custom done away with?

    E. F. L.

_Leslie, Bishop of Down._--Can any of your correspondents give any
information as to the father of Henry Leslie, some time Bishop of Down
and Connor, and who was promoted at the Restoration to the bishopric of
Meath, where he died?

    E. F. L.

_Chaplains to the Forces._--When was this appointment first made? and
where is any list of the successive chaplains to be found?

    G.

_John of Horsill._--Could either of your correspondents favour me with
an account of this worthy? Tradition states he held the manors of
Ribbesford and Highlington, near Bewdley (Worcestershire), about the
twelfth century. Several legends, approaching very near to facts, are
extant in this neighbourhood concerning him; one of the best
authenticated is as follows:

Hunting one day near the Severn, he started a fine buck, which took the
direction of the river; fearing to lose it, he discharged an arrow,
which, piercing it through, continued its flight, and struck a salmon,
which had (as is customary with such fish in shallow streams) leaped
from the surface of the water, with so much force as to transfix it.
This being thought a very extraordinary shot (as indeed it was), a stone
carving representing it was fixed over the west door of Ribbesford
Church, then in course of erection. A description of this carving is, I
believe, in Nash's _History of Worcestershire_, but without any mention
of the legend. The carving merely shows a rude human figure with a bow,
and a salmon transfixed with an arrow before it. A few facts concerning
this "John of Horsill" would be hailed with much pleasure by your well
wisher,

    H. CORVILLE WARDE.

  Kidderminster.

_St. Crispin's Day._--In the parishes of Cuckfield and Hurst-a-point in
Sussex, it is still the custom to observe St. Crispin's day, and it is
kept with much rejoicing. The boys go round asking for money in the name
of St. Crispin, bonfires are lighted, and it passes off very much in the
same way as the fifth of November does. It appears, from an inscription
on a monument to one of the ancient family of Bunell in the parish
church of Cuckfield, that a Sir John Bunell attended Henry V. to France
in the year 1415, with one ship, twenty men-at-arms, and forty archers;
and it is probable that the observance of this day in that neighbourhood
is connected with that fact. If so, though the names of--

      "Harry the king, Bedford, and Exeter,
      Warwick and Talbot, Salisbury and Gloster,"

have ceased to be "familiar as household words" in the mouths of the
people, yet it is a curious proof for what length of time a usage may be
transmitted, though the origin of it may be lost.

If any of your correspondents can inform me whether St. Crispin's Day is
observed in their neighborhood, and, if so, whether such cases can be
connected, as in the present instance, with some old warrior of
Agincourt, they will much oblige

    R. W. B.

_Poniatowski Gems._--When were these gems sold in London, and where can
I get particulars of the prices, purchasers' names, &c., and any
critical remarks upon them that may have appeared on the time of the
sale?

    A. O. O. D.

_Why Cold Pudding settles one's Love?_--At a Christmas party, recently,
the question occurred "Whence the origin of the supposed attribute of
cold plum pudding of settling one's love?" No one present being able to
give a satisfactory solution, it was agreed that I should take your
opinion on the subject. I therefore ask, How old is the saying? and to
what part of England or Great Britain may it be traced?

    AN "F. S. A." WHO LOVES PUDDING.


Minor Queries Answered.

_Poem by Camden._--Where is the Latin poem by Camden, _De Connubio Thamæ
et Isis_, to be found?

Camden (in _Britannia, sine Regnorum Anglæ Chorographica Descriptio_,
folio, London, 1607) quotes very largely from this poem, of which he is
the reputed author, viz., page 215, 19 lines; page 272-3, 64 lines; page
302, 12 lines.

Dr. Kippis, _Biographia Britannica_, article "Camden," in vol. iii.,
assigns the poem to Camden; and Dr. Robert Watt, _Bibliotheca
Britannica_, speaks of it under _Isis_, and refers to a translation of
it by Basil Kennet, the brother of White Kennet, Bishop of Peterborough.

These authorities induce me to think either the Latin poem, or the
translation, must be in existence, though, I regret to say, I cannot
find either.

    QUÆRO.

  [A query relating to this poem has already appeared, see "N. & Q."
  Vol. ii., p 392. Having investigated it, we are inclined to think,
  that only those portions of it which appear in the _Britannia_
  have been published. Mr. Salmon, in his _Hertfordshire_, p. 3.,
  speaking of the word _Tamesis_ being a compound of the two rivers
  Tame and Isis, says, "Of this Mr. Camden was so assured, that he
  hath left us an elegant poem upon the marriage of these two
  streams _in his Britannia_." As to Dr. Basil Kennet's translation,
  it is clear from Bishop Gibson's Preface, p. xiv., that he only
  translated what has been given in this work. The Bishop says, "The
  verses which occur in Mr. Camden's text were translated by Mr.
  Kennet, of Corpus Christi College in Oxford."]

_Marches of Wales and Lords Marchers._--Can any of your correspondents
define briefly the _Marches_ of Wales, what localities were comprehended
within the _Marches_, the meaning of the word, as also the term Lords
Marchers? Is there any work in which explanation sought can be found?

    G.

  [Consult Camden's _Britannia_, by Gibson, vol. i. p. 470., vol.
  ii. p. 199.; Warrington's _History of Wales_, vol. i. pp.
  369-384.; and _Penny Cyclopædia_, art. _Marches_.]




Replies.


MORAVIAN HYMNS.

(Vol. iv., p. 502.)

I offer P. H. the best information I have. It is scanty, but as a few
years ago there was much competition for Moravian hymn-books, probably
some fortunate possessor of an _editio princeps_ may be induced to tell
us more about them.

Of the editions which I have seen, the later is always _tamer_ than its
predecessors. I have one entitled _A Collection of Hymns, consisting
chiefly of Translations from the German. Part 3. The Second Edition.
London: printed for James Hutton, Bookseller in Fetter Lane, over
against West Harding Street_, MDCCXLIX. After the manner of German
hymn-books, though in verse, it is printed as prose. I have never seen
Part I. or II.; and though a book which had reached a second edition
only a century ago cannot, under ordinary circumstances, be scarce,
several booksellers and book-fanciers, who have seen mine, declare that
they think it unique. It is probable that ridicule and misconstruction
induced the heads of the congregation to make great alterations and
omissions in fresh editions, and to recommend the destruction of the
old, as a means of avoiding scandal. Very good reason they had for so
doing, as the meaning of spiritual love is often so corporeally
expressed as to make Tabitha's dream, in the _New Bath Guide_, fall far
short of the intensity of the serious work. I cannot find the "chicken
blessed," as cited by Anstey, but have no doubt that it is genuine, as
well as those in the _Oxford Magazine_. At page 86. of my copy is a
different version of that given by P. H. It is called the "Single
Sister's Hymn." Tune: "How is my heart," &c.

      "To you ye Jesu's Wounds!
      We pay
      A Thousand thankful tears this day,
      That you have us presented
      With many happy
      Virgin-Rows,
      Who without nunnery, are close to Jesu's heart cemented.
      This is a bliss which is sure
      To secure
      Virgin-carriage,
      In the state itself of marriage."

It is obvious that this is an amended version. I believe these hymns
were translated by persons not very familiar with the English language.
The versification is occasionally good and harmonious, but generally
lame, and the language abounding with Hebraisms and Germanisms. The
matter is often indescribably puerile; and, though composed _bonâ fide_,
would look profane and licentious in quotation.

I have another edition, "chiefly extracted from the Larger Hymn-book,"
London, 1769. It has bad English, bad verse, and puerility; but is not
indelicate.

    H. B. C.

  U. U. Club.


WADY MOKATTEB NOT MENTIONED IN NUM. XI. 26.

(Vol. iv., p. 481.)

MR. MARGOLIOUTH, in his communication on this subject, has not dealt
fairly with the text which he quotes. It is as follows:

  "But there remained two of the men in the camp, the name of the
  one was Eldad, and the name of the other was Medad; and the Spirit
  rested upon them, and they were of them that were written, _but
  they went not out unto the tabernacle: and they prophesied in the
  camp_."

The concluding clause, which I have printed in italics, has been omitted
by MR. MARGOLIOUTH, although it is plainly an essential part of the
passage, and necessary to the complete statement of the facts narrated.

MR. MARGOLIOUTH would translate the passage thus: "And the Spirit rested
upon them, and they were in _The Cethubrin_ (_i.e._ in Wady Mokatteb),
but they went not out unto the tabernacle: and they prophesied in the
camp."

He does not, however, explain how Eldad and Medad were in Wady Mokatteb,
more than Moses and the rest of the seventy. The camp itself was in Wady
Mokatteb, according to MR. MARGOLIOUTH's hypothesis, and therefore there
is no opposition between Eldad and Medad being there, and yet remaining
in the camp. But assuredly some opposition is evidently intended between
Eldad and Medad being בכתובים amongst them that were written, and the
clause (omitted by MR. MARGOLIOUTH) "but they went not out unto the
tabernacle."

The authorized English version is in accordance with all the ancient
versions, the Chaldee paraphrase, and the commentators, Jewish as well
as Christian. And I think it gives also the common sense view of the
passage.

Moses had complained of the great burden which rested upon him. "I am
not able (he says) to bear all this people alone, because it is too
heavy for me." He was directed, therefore, to choose seventy men of the
elders of Israel; and God promised him "I will take of the spirit which
is upon thee, and will put it upon them, and they shall bear the burden
of the people with thee, that thou bear it not alone."

Accordingly Moses brought out the seventy chosen elders, and stationed
them round the tabernacle, and they there received the spirit of
prophecy in some visible manner, so as to make their divine commission
publicly known among the people; but two of them, named Eldad and Medad
(the text goes on to say) remained in the camp, and nevertheless they
also received the spirit of prophecy, for they were of them that were
written בכתובים (_i.e._ they were of the number of the seventy whom
Moses had selected), although they went not out to the tabernacle with
the others: "καὶ οὗτοι ἦσαν ἐκ τῶν καταγεγραμμένων, nam et ipsi
descripti fuerant," are the versions of the LXX. and Latin Vulgate. And
this is evidently the meaning of the passage; for if Eldad and Medad
had not been of the chosen seventy, they would have had no right to go
out with the others to the tabernacle, and the remark of the historian,
"that they remained in the camp _and went not out unto the
tabernacle_," would have been without point or meaning. MR.
MARGOLIOUTH, therefore, was quite right to omit these words, as they
completely overturn his hypothesis.

Why these two elders remained in the camp is not expressly stated in the
inspired narrative. Raschi says,--

  ‪מאותן שנבחרו אמרו אין אנו כדאי לגדולה הזה׃

  "They were of those who were chosen, but they said, we are not
  sufficient for this great thing."

He goes on to tell us that Moses being perplexed how to choose seventy
elders out of the twelve tribes, without giving offence to some one
tribe by choosing a smaller number out of it, selected six out of each
tribe, which made seventy-two, and determined by lot the two who were to
be omitted. Raschi does not say (as Lightfoot, and after him, Bishop
Patrick, seem to have imagined) that the two rejected elders were Eldad
and Medad, for this would be inconsistent with the words just quoted,
where he ascribes their remaining behind to their humility and sense of
insufficiency for so great a work; and I need scarcely say that the text
of the Scripture gives no authority for the story of the seventy-two
chosen, and the two rejected by lot. But even this story sufficiently
proves that the ancient Jewish commentators understood the words
‪ומה כתובים as they are rendered by our English translators.

MR. MARGOLIOUTH's conjecture, therefore, is totally without foundation;
it is not supported by any authority, and is even inconsistent with the
plain words of the text. I should be sorry to see "N. & Q." made the
vehicle of such rash and unsound criticisms, and therefore I send you
this refutation of it.

With respect to Wady Mokatteb, it would be very desirable to have the
singular inscriptions there extant carefully copied by competent
scholars. Hitherto we have been forced to content ourselves with the
drawings sent home by chance travellers; would it not be possible to
organize a caravan of competent persons, having some knowledge of
oriental tongues and alphabets, to explore these interesting valleys,
and bring home correct transcripts of their inscriptions? Many noblemen
and gentlemen spend annually on travelling and yachting much more money
than would be necessary to organize such an expedition as I am
suggesting; and if a party put their funds together, and took with them
artists to make the drawings, with a couple of well qualified scholars
to assist in deciphering them, I think they might spend as pleasant, and
certainly a much more profitable, summer, than in ascending Mont Blanc,
or drinking sack in the Rhine steam-boats. Perhaps, also, the
improvements in the daguerreotype and talbotype processes might be made
available for securing absolute accuracy in the fac-similes of the
inscriptions.

    JAMES H. TODD.

  Trinity Coll. Dublin.

In reference to these celebrated inscriptions, a remarkable statement
occurs in the _Journal Asiatique_ for 1836, tom. ii. p. 182., of which I
annex a translation:--

  "M. Fræhn has discovered in an Arabian author,
  Ibn-abi-Yakoub-el-Nedim, who wrote in 987, a passage stating that
  at that period the Russians already possessed the art of writing.
  This author has even preserved a specimen of Russian writing of
  the tenth century, which, he says, he received from an ambassador
  sent to Russia by one of the Princes of the Caucasus. These
  characters do not resemble the Greek alphabet, or the runes of the
  Scandinavian races. It would appear, therefore, that the first
  germ of civilisation in Russia preceded the establishment of Rurik
  and the Varangi in this country, instead of having been introduced
  by them. A circumstance of peculiar interest is, that these
  ancient Russian letters, so different from any other alphabet,
  have the greatest analogy with those inscriptions, yet
  unexplained, sculptured on the rocks of the desert between Suez
  and Mount Sinai, and noticed there in the sixth century of our
  æra. The analogy existing between these inscriptions placed on the
  confines of Africa and Asia, and others found in Siberia, had
  already been demonstrated by Tychsen. M. Fræhn is about to publish
  this interesting discovery."

Query, what ground is there for the above assertions, and what has been
since published in support of such a statement?

      μ.


BOILING TO DEATH AS A PUNISHMENT.

(Vol. ii., p. 519.)

L. H. K. gives an extract from Howe's _Chronicle_, detailing the
punishment of one _Richard Rose_ (as also of another person) in the
above manner for the crime of poisoning, and inquires if this was a
peculiar mode of punishing of _cooks_. No reply to this having yet
appeared, and the subject being only incidentally mentioned at Vol.
iii., p. 153., I venture to submit to you the following Notes I have
made upon it.

The crime of poisoning was always considered as most detestable,
"because it can, of all others, be the least prevented either by manhood
or forethought." Nevertheless, prior to the statute of 22 Hen. VIII. c.
9. there was no peculiarity in the mode of punishment. The occurrence to
which Howe refers, appears to have excited considerable attention,
probably on account of the supposition that the life of the bishop was
aimed at; so much so, that the extraordinary step was taken of passing
an Act of Parliament, _retrospective_ in its enactments as against the
culprit (who is variously described as _Rose_, _Roose_, otherwise
_Cooke_, and _Rouse_), prescribing the mode of punishment as above, and
declaring the crime of poisoning to be treason for the future. The
occurrence is thus related in a foot-note to Rapin, 2nd edit. vol. i. p.
792.:--

  "During this Session of Parliament [1531] one _Richard Rouse_, a
  _cook_, on the 16th February poisoned some soop in the Bishop of
  Rochester's kitchen, with which seventeen persons were mortally
  infected; and one of the gentlemen died of it, and some poor
  people that were charitably fed with the remainder were also
  infected, one woman dying. The person was apprehended; and by Act
  of Parliament poisoning was declared treason, and _Rouse_ was
  attainted and _sentenced to be boiled to death_, which was to be
  the punishment of poisoning for all times to come. The sentence
  was executed in Smithfield soon after."

This horrible punishment did not remain on the Statute Books for any
very lengthened period, the above statute of Henry being repealed by
statutes 1 Edw. VI. c. 12., and 1 Mary, stat. I. c. 1., by which all
_new_ treasons were abolished, since which the punishment has been the
same as in other cases of murder. If within the reach of any
correspondent, an extract from the statute of Henry would be
interesting.

    J. B. COLMAN.

  Eye, Dec. 16. 1851.

  [The Act of 22 Hen. VIII. c. 9. recites, that "nowe in the tyme of
  this presente parliament, that is to saye, in the xviijth daye of
  Februarye in the xxij yere of his moste victorious reygn, one
  Richard Roose late of Rouchester in the countie of Kent, coke,
  otherwyse called Richard Coke, of his moste wyked and dampnable
  dysposicyon dyd caste a certyne venym or poyson into a vessell
  replenysshed with yeste or barme stondyng in the kechyn of the
  Reverende Father in God John Bysshopp of Rochester at his place in
  Lamebyth Marsshe, wyth whych yeste or barme and other thynges
  convenyent porrage or gruel was forthwyth made for his famylye
  there beyng, wherby nat only the nombre of xvij persons of his
  said famylie whych dyd eate of that porrage were mortally enfected
  and poysoned, and one of them, that is to say, Benett Curwen
  gentylman therof is deceassed, but also certeyne pore people which
  resorted to the sayde Bysshops place and were there charytably
  fedde wyth the remayne of the saide porrage and other vytayles,
  were in lyke wyse infected, and one pore woman of them, that is to
  saye, Alyce Tryppytt wydowe, is also thereof now deceassed: our
  sayde Sovereign Lorde the Kynge of hys blessed disposicion
  inwardly abhorryng all such abhomynable offences because that in
  maner no persone can lyve in suertye out of daunger of death by
  that meane yf practyse therof should not be exchued, hath ordeyned
  and enacted by auctorytie of thys presente parlyament that the
  sayde poysonyng be adjudged and demed as high treason. And that
  the sayde Richard [Rose or Roose] for the sayd murder and
  poysonynge of the said two persones as is aforesayde by auctoritie
  of this presente parlyament shall stande and be attaynted of highe
  treason: And by cause that detestable offence nowe newly practysed
  and com̅ytted requyreth condign̅e punysshemente for the same;
  It is ordeyned and enacted by auctoritie of this present
  parlyament that the said Richard Roose shalbe therfore boyled to
  deathe withoute havynge any advauntage of his clargie. And that
  from hensforth every wylfull murder of any persone or persones by
  any whatsoever persone or persones herafter to be com̅ytted and
  done by meane or waye of poysonyng shalbe reputed, demed, and
  juged in the lawe to be highe treason; And that all and every
  persone or persones which hereafter shalbe lawfully indyted
  appeled and attaynted or condemned of such treson for any maner
  poysonyng shall not be admytted to the benefyte of hys or theyre
  clargye, but shalbe immedyatly committed to execucion of deth by
  boylynge for the same.]


THE ROMAN INDEX EXPURGATORIUS OF 1607.

(Vol. iv., p. 440.)

U. U. will be extremely sorry to hear that he has not any reason for
persuading himself that his copy of this Index belongs to the original
edition. On account of the difference of spaces observed in the reprint,
each page, though containing only the same matter that appears in the
earlier impression, has been elongated to the extent required for three
lines. The Ratisbon octavo is generally about an inch taller, and a
third part thicker, than the Roman volume. The woodcuts are totally
distinct, and are better in the authentic book; and the _beau papier_,
of which Clement speaks, at once eliminates the modern pretender.

I have been able to obtain two copies of the genuine Vatican Index as
well as its Serpilian rival; and with respect to what your correspondent
calls "the _Bergomi_" (more properly the _Bergamo_) "edition" of 1608, I
beg to assure him that there is an "undoubted" exemplar likewise
producible, and that I have dispersed a thousand facsimiles of it since
the ear 1837.

U. U. has charged Mr. Mendham with having imagined that "Brasichellen"
was a "complete" word. I happen to know very well, and many of your
readers also know, that my excellent friend is not altogether such a
simpleton; but he will most probably not take the trouble on this
occasion to defend himself. The fact is, that the Serpilian counterfeit
alone is without the full stop in the case of this word, which in the
Bergamo titlepage ends at "Brasichell." The master of the sacred palace,
with whom we are now concerned, is very rarely mentioned as Giovanni
Maria da _Brisighella_, the designation which he rightly gives to
himself in his Italian edicts; and the Latinized forms _Brasichellanus_
and _Brasichellensis_ easily arrive at English abridgments. In 1607,
when the Vatican Expurgatory Index was first published, the
Commissary-General of the Roman Inquisition was Agostino Galamini da
_Brisighella_, and his name is sometimes found recorded, unstopped, as
"Augustinus Galaminius _Brasichellen_."

    R. G.


HOBBES'S "LEVIATHAN."

(Vol. iv., pp. 314. 487.)

I am surprised that your correspondent H. A. B., who appears by his
expressions to be an admirer of the _Leviathan_, should think the
frontispiece an absurd conceit, very unworthy of its author. The design
may be regarded, I think, as a very remarkable embodiment of the thought
expressed in the passage where the term _Leviathan_ is first used. The
civil body or commonwealth, derived from the union of individuals, is
represented by Hobbes as the origin of all rights and duties. And this
combination of men is (_Leviathan_, p. 87.) something more than consent
and concord. It is the real unity of them all in one and the same
person. The multitude, so united in one person, is called a
_Commonwealth_. "This is the generation," he says, "of that great
_Leviathan_, or, to speak more reverently" (that is, with the reverence
due to it), "of that _mortal God_ to which we owe (under the _Immortal
God_) our peace and defence." This "mortal God," thus constituted, may
very fitly be represented by the giant image, made up of thousands of
individual forms, wielding the mighty sword and the magnificent crosier,
and spreading its arms, with an air of sovereignty, over castles and
churches, rivers and ports, fields and villages. The emblems then
represent, as H. A. B. observes, the manifestations of civil and of
ecclesiastical power; and the parallelisms there exhibited appear to me
to be curious: the castle, with a piece of ordnance discharged from the
walls; the church, with a figure of Faith on its roof; the coronet and
the mitre; the cannon, the thunderbolt of war; and the spiritual
fulmination, represented by the mythological thunderbolts; the arms of
Logic, Syllogism, and Dilemma, and the like; and the arms of war, pikes,
and swords, and muskets; and finally, the judiciary tribunal, and the
tribunal of the battle field, the _ultima ratio regum_.

The frontispiece in the edition of 1651 is a much better print than that
of 1750; and in the former, I think, the resemblance to Cromwell is
undeniable. In this edition, the tablet at the bottom has the words,
"London: _Printed for Andrew Crooke_, 1651." In the edition of 1750
there are on the tablet the words, "_Written by Thos. Hobbs_, 1651," as
C. J. W. states.

    W. W.


MAJOR-GEN. JAMES WOLFE.

(Vol. iv., pp. 271. 322. 438. 503.)

If the follows remarkable lines, described to me as having been placed
many years ago under a bust of General Wolfe, in the Old Castle at
Quebec, should not be well known, I think they merit a place in your
pages. My friend who sent the verses could not supply the author's name,
nor state whether they still remain _in situ quo_, though I have some
idea that the Old Castle was burnt:

      "Let no sad tear upon his tomb be shed.
      A common tribute to the common dead.
      But let the Good, the Generous, and the Brave,
      With godlike envy, sigh for such a grave."

I may as well add, in reply to the Query in your 113th No., page 504.,
that my worthy friend and neighbour, Mr. Richard Birch Wolfe, the
present representative of the Wolfes of North Essex, upon inquiry at the
College of Arms, was unable to trace any relationship between his family
and that of the General.

    BRAYBROOKE.

  Audley End.

Mrs. Wolfe's maiden name was Henrietta Thompson; she was of a Yorkshire
family, and "own sister to my sister Apthorp," says Cole, "the wife of
the Reverend Dr. Apthorp, Fellow of Eton College, so that my nieces
Frances and Anne Apthorp were first cousins to the General." This lady
died on Wednesday, Sept. 26, 1764, at her house in Greenwich, and is
described as "the relict of Col. Edward Wolfe, and mother to the late
heroic General Wolfe." (_Public Advertiser_, Sept. 28, 1764.) The
official letter from General Wolfe, dated Sept. 9, 1759, is in print. On
Nov. 18, in that year, his body was landed from the "Royal William" at
Portsmouth. Three affecting letters of the bereaved mother to William
Pitt, dated Nov. 6th, 27th, 30th, are likewise published. On March 26,
1759, she had been left a widow by her husband Edward, who was in 1745
Colonel of H. M. 8th regiment of infantry, and appointed
Lieutenant-General in 1747. In 1758, General James Wolfe was Colonel of
H.M. 67th regiment of foot. By her will, Mrs. Wolfe devised 500_l._ to
the maintenance and repairs of Bromley College (_Cambridge Chronicle_,
Sat. April 27, 1765); and, her debts and legacies being first paid,
bequeathed the residue of her property to poor and deserving persons,
with preference to the widows and families of soldiers who had served
under her gallant son. The applicants were to send in their names to
Jas. Gunter, attorney, of Tooley Street, Southwark, before Jan. 1, 1766
(_Whitehall Even. Post_, Thursday, Aug. 22, 1765). The monument to Gen.
Wolfe's memory, in Westerham Church, is of white marble, and set up over
the south door. The inscription has been given already in Vol. iv., p.
322.; but with the omission of any mention of a black tablet beneath,
inscribed "I, decus, I, nostrum." He was baptized on Jan. 11, 1727. I
subjoin an obituary, and other notices of persons of his name:

  1764. "Wednesday, at Westminster, Dec. 28, Lady Anne Wolfe, aunt
  to the late General, a maiden lady."--_The Gazetteer_, Friday,
  Jan. 4, 1765.

  1677. Oct. 14. Thomas Wolfe, D.M. Oxon, 1653.

  1703. April 6. Sir John Wolfe, Knt., Ald. London.

  1711. Dec. 10. Sir Joseph Wolfe, Knt., Ald. London.

  1748. May 27. John Wolfe, Secretary to the Chancellor of the Duchy
  of Lancaster.

  1755. Nov. 12. Mrs. Wolfe, of Queen's Square.

  1759. Sept. 21. Jacob Wolfe, Consul at St. Petersburg.

  1791. Feb. 25. Mrs. ----, wife of Lewis Wolfe, Esq., Compt. at the
  Stationer's Office.

  1793. Dec.--Rev. Thos. Wolfe of Howick, Northumberland.

  1794. Aug. 2. Mrs. ----, relict of the above, at Saffron Walden.

  1795. Jan. 27. Robert Wolfe, of Cork.

  ---- May 18. Rev. B. Wolfe, Schoolmaster of Dillon.

  ---- June 25. Thomas Wolfe.

  William Twenshow of Arclyd, co. Chester, born 1666, married Anne,
  sister of Edward Wolfe, Esq., of Hatherton.

  Robert French, married Anne, daughter of Richard Wolfe, and niece
  of Theobald Wolfe of Baronsrath, co. Kildare.

  Rev. James Jones, of Merrion Square, married Lydia, d. of Mr.
  Theobald Wolfe; she died in 1793.

    MACKENZIE WALCOTT, M.A.

  Jermyn Street.

In Vol. iv., p. 271., inquiry is made for the parentage of the mother of
Gen. Wolfe. I have accidentally discovered, in turning over Burke's
_Landed Gentry_ (p. 1389.), that she was a Thompson. Sir Henry Thompson,
who was three times married, had, by his first wife, Henry, M.P. for
York, the grandfather of Jane, married to Sir Robert Lawley, by whom she
was mother of Paul Beilby Thompson, late Lord Wenlock. By his third
wife, Susanna Lovel, Sir Henry had a son Edward, who married a lady
named Tindal, and had issue, Edward, also M.P. for York; Francis, a
lieut.-colonel; Bradwarden, a captain; Mary, married to General Whetham;
and "Henrietta, mar. Colonel Wolfe, and was mother of General Wolfe,
killed at Quebec."

    N.

Will it serve your correspondent Ȝ., to state that at Inversnaid, on
the borders of Loch Lomond, where Wordsworth met his immortalised
"Highland Girl," there is a ruined fort, erected in 1716 to keep the
clan Gregor in order, and which was taken and retaken, repaired and
dismantled, but which, after the rebellion of '45, was occupied by the
king's troops? There is a tradition that General James Wolfe was, for a
time, stationed here. This tradition is referred to in all the guide
Books, but no precise date is given.

    G. W.

In the United States Institution there is a pencil profile of General
Wolfe. It was presented to that collection by the Duke of Northumberland
(when Lord Prudhoe).

On the back of the sketch itself are written these words:

  "This sketch belonged to Lieut.-Col. Gwillim, A.D. Camp to Genl.
  Wolfe when he was killed. It is supposed to have been sketched by
  Harvey Smith."

On the back of the frame there is a paper, with the following
inscription:

  "This portrait of General Wolfe, from which his bust was
  principally taken, was hastily sketched by Harvey Smith, one of
  his aid-de-camps, a very short time before that distinguished
  officer was killed on the plains of Abraham. It then came into the
  possession of Colonel Gwillim, another of the General's
  aid-de-camps, who died afterwards at Gibraltar; and from him to
  Mrs. Simcoe, the Colonel's only daughter and heiress; then to
  Major-General Darling (who was on General Simcoe's staff); and is
  now presented by him to his Grace the Duke of Northumberland.

  "Alnwick, Jan. 23, 1832."

This interesting sketch hangs near the case containing the sword worn by
Wolfe when he fell.

    L. H. J. T.


"THERE IS NO MISTAKE."

(Vol. iv., p. 471.)

It may, perhaps, have puzzled others of your readers, as for some time
it did myself, to account for your correspondent F. W. J. having
undertaken to prove that the Duke of Wellington did not first use "those
celebrated words" _there is no mistake_, in his "reply to Mr.
Huskisson." F. W. J. shows that the Duke wrote "the sentence now so well
known" is 1812. No doubt he did: and it may not unreasonably be assumed
that he had used it many hundred times before under similar
circumstances. F. W. J. evidently confounds those words used by the Duke
in their natural sense with the slang phrase which has been current for
some years, and owes its origin, I believe, to a character in a farce,
"and no mistake." The slang phrase is used by way of binding or
confirming; as, for instance, "I will be there at two o'clock, _and no
mistake_,"--the latter words being equivalent to "You may depend on it:"
if, indeed, it be possible to fix a precise meaning to words so
improperly applied. It is hardly necessary to say, that in both the
instances referred to by your correspondent, the Duke used the words in
their natural and proper sense. F. W. J. is wrong in supposing that the
Duke used the phrase in his "reply to Mrs. Huskisson;" it was to Lord
Dudley his Grace addressed the words. Mr. Huskisson having voted against
his colleagues on the question of transferring the franchise from East
Retford to Birmingham, went straight from the House of Commons to his
office in Downing Street, and wrote a letter to the Duke, then Prime
Minister, announcing that he lost no time in affording his Grace an
opportunity of placing his (Mr. Huskisson's) office in other hands, as
the only means in his power of preventing the injury to the King's
service which might ensue from the appearance of disunion in His
Majesty's councils, &c. On receipt of Mr. Huskisson's note, the Duke
wrote to that gentleman stating that he had deemed it his duty to lay
his note before the King. It happened that the Duke's note reached Mr.
Huskisson whilst he was engaged in conversation with Lord Dudley, to
whom he had been describing his own note to the Duke, and speaking of it
(strange enough) as if it had not been a tender of resignation. When Mr.
Huskisson showed Lord Dudley the Duke's letter, which showed that his
Grace took a different view of the matter, his Lordship, knowing what
Mr. Huskisson had been telling him, naturally enough said that the Duke
must be labouring under a mistake. But this incident was narrated with
so much _naïveté_ by Mr. Huskisson himself, that I am tempted to quote
his words (spoken in the House of Commons) as they were reported in the
_Times_, June 3, 1828:--

  "Upon showing this (the Duke's) letter to Lord Dudley, so struck
  was he with the the different import which the Duke of Wellington
  attached to the matter from that which was impressed on himself by
  the previous conversation, that he remarked, 'Oh, I see the Duke
  has entirely mistaken your meaning: I will go and see him, and set
  the matter right.' (A laugh.) Lord Dudley returned shortly after
  seeing the Duke, and said, 'I am sorry to say I have not been
  successful. He (the Duke) says it is no mistake; it can be no
  mistake; and (if Mr. Huskisson's relation of the words were not
  imperfectly heard, for he let his voice drop repeatedly) it shall
  be no mistake." (Loud laughter.)

    C. ROSS.


THE REV. MR. GAY.

(Vol. iv., p. 388.)

I am greatly obliged by the communication of your correspondent relative
to the Gays connected with Sidney College. It was as from that quarter I
expected light. The passage in Paley's _Life of Law_, which is to me of
considerable interest, long ago attracted my attention, although it
escaped notice at the moment when I ventured to send my first inquiry.
It runs as follows:

  "Our Bishop always spoke of this gentleman in terms of the
  greatest respect. In the Bible, and in the writings of Mr. Locke,
  no man, he used to say, was so well versed."

Thus I find the passage quoted from Paley in Nichols' _Literary
Anecdotes of the Eighteenth Century_, vol. ii. p. 66. Bishop Law also
mentions him in a letter to Dr. Zach. Grey, editor of _Hudibras_:
"Respects to _honest_ Mr. Gay, and all friends in St. John's." The
letter was written from Graystock, May 31, 1743. The full address of Dr.
Grey unfortunately is not given where I find the letter, in the same
vol. of Nichols, p. 535. But we may safely gather from it, that at that
time "_honest_ Mr. Gay" was at Cambridge, and in esteem; whether a
resident, as should seem most likely from the manner of the notice, or a
casual visitor, does not certainly appear. If a resident, this is not
consistent with the idea of your correspondent, that he became vicar of
Wilshamstead, Bedfordshire, and vacated his fellowship before 1732. I
wish that the identity of the author of the Dissertation with the John
Gay--first in the list of your correspondent--an identity to which my
mind also inclines, could be more clearly made out. He was born, and
partly educated, in Devonshire.

A private correspondent has very kindly furnished me with a few
particulars relative to Nicholas Gay, the second mentioned in your
correspondent's list, and father of the fourth, which Nicholas was vicar
of Newton St. Cyres, near Exeter, and died, æt. seventy-five, in 1775;
and to another, Richard Gay, rector of St. Leonard, near Exeter, who
died in 1755. Of this Richard Gay, on a stone in the church of
Frithelstock, near Torrington, it is said that--

  "To great learning, he added a most exemplary life in constant
  faithful endeavours to support religion, to glorify God, and to do
  good to man. He was equalled by few, surpassed by none of the age
  he lived in."

To such a character, one would gladly attach the Dissertation in
question, but no Richard Gay, it appears, is mentioned in the records of
Sidney College. There were many Gays in Devonshire of the family of John
Gay the poet.

Permit me to make another inquiry: Is there any tolerably good account
in existence of the private or domestic life of the celebrated Lord
North, minister and favourite of George III.? Of his political career, a
pleasing sketch is given by Lord Brougham, in his _Historical Sketches
of Statesmen_, and many delightful anecdotes of his incomparable temper
and playful wit are known; but of his domestic history I cannot find a
trace.

    EDWARD TAGART.

  Wildwood, Hampstead.


PARISH REGISTERS, RIGHT OF SEARCH.

(Vol. iv., p. 473.)

As the Query herein appears to be one which it is more the province of
the lawyer to answer, I take the liberty of submitting the following for
your correspondent's consideration.

The ecclesiastical mode of registration appears now to be regulated by
52 Geo. III. c. 146., which still remains in force (except with regard
to marriages, which was repealed on the introduction of the civil
method) as far as regards baptisms and burials; and by the 16th section
of that act, a proviso is enacted, that nothing in that act should
diminish or increase the fees theretofore payable, or of right due, to
any minister for the performance of the _before_-mentioned duties, &c.

The before-mentioned duties here referred to were, that they (the
officiating ministers) should keep the registers of public and private
baptisms, marriages, and burials in books for that purpose provided by
the parish, that they should as soon after the solemnisation of the
ceremony as possible enter it in the register. That such Register Books
should be kept in the custody of the minister in an iron chest, which
was to be kept locked, except for the purpose of making the entries as
above, _or for the inspection of persons desirous to make search
therein_, or to obtain copies, or for production as evidence, or for
inspection as to their condition, or for the purposes of that act. That,
within a stated period, the ministers should make copies (annually) of
the registers, verify them, and transmit the copies to the registrar of
the diocese. Now these just mentioned are the duties referred to in the
act, so far as they concern our inquiry; and the fees payable have been
the fee of one guinea for keeping the registers, a fee allowed by the
parish for sending copies of them to the registrar of the diocese; but I
do not observe any fee for any person searching, or even obtaining
copies of any entry of baptism or burial, if they feel so disposed.

The civil method of registration is regulated by the 6 & 7 Will. IV. c.
86.; and by the 35th section it is enacted:

  "That every rector, vicar, or curate, and every registrar,
  registering officer, and secretary who shall have the keeping for
  the time being of any Register Books of _births_, _deaths_, or
  marriages, shall at all reasonable times allow _searches_ to be
  made of any _Register Book_ in his keeping, and shall give a copy
  certified under his hand of any entry or entries in the same on
  payment of ... for every search extending over a period not more
  than one year, the sum of one shilling, and sixpence additional
  for every additional year; and the sum of two shillings and
  sixpence for every single certificate."

This will be seen to comprehend such Register Books as apply to births
and deaths only, and not to those containing baptisms and burials (which
latter are only in the custody of the officiating ministers); and
although some doubts may arise from the words "allow searches to be made
of _any Register Book_ in his keeping," I am of opinion that "the
Register Book" here meant "in his keeping" only applies to the
description just preceding, viz. of "_births and deaths_." I am inclined
to think that no fee is payable legally to the minister _for searching_
the Register Books of _baptisms or burials_, nor even for making a copy
of an entry therein by any persons if they feel disposed to take a copy
themselves.

In the same act, sec. 49., a provision is enacted that nothing in that
act shall affect the _registration_ of baptisms or burials as then by
law established, or the right of any officiating minister to receive the
usual fees for the _performance or registration_ of any baptism, burial,
or marriage: so that there is nothing even in this controlling clause
last quoted, that at all affects the right of persons to search without
fee the registers of baptisms or burials, or even of making copies; for
that clause simply refers to the fact of registering, and the fees
payable for solemnising the same, and the registration, although I am
not aware that there is a fee for registering a baptism, although it was
so in William III.'s reign.

By the 12th sect. of the 52 Geo. III. c. 146. (the latter part of it), I
find that the copies of the registers which are transmitted by the
minister annually to the registrar of the diocese, are to be arranged,
and an alphabetical list of names to be made by the registrar; and such
copies and list to be open to _public search_ at all reasonable times
upon _payment of their usual fees_. This of course does not apply to the
_baptismal or burial registers_ in the custody of the minister; but it
is quoted that your correspondent may be in possession of the whole
facts, for it is undoubtedly most important to the genealogical or
archæological inquirer. If I am wrong, I shall be glad to stand
corrected on the error being pointed out.

    JOHN NURSE CHADWICK.

  King's Lynn, Dec. 15, 1851.


Replies to Minor Queries.

_Proverbs_ (Vol. iv., p. 239.).--A proverb has been well defined (it is
said by Lord John Russell) to be "the wisdom of many, and the wit of
one."

    ESTE.

_Infantry Firing_ (Vol. iv., p. 407.).--The following short paragraph on
this subject may be acceptable to your correspondent H. Y. W. N. I found
it among a small collection of newspaper cuttings; but I cannot give
either the name or date of the paper from which it was taken.

  "MUSKET BALLS.--Marshal Saxe computed that, in a battle, only one
  ball of eighty-five takes effect. Others, that only one in forty
  strikes, and no more than one in four hundred is fatal. At the
  battle of Tournay, in Flanders, fought on the 22nd of May, 1794,
  it is calculated that two hundred and thirty-six musket-shot were
  expended in disabling each soldier who suffered."

    C. FORBES.

  Temple.

_Joceline's Legacy_ (Vol. iv., pp. 367. 410. 454.).--Having at length
obtained a copy of the edition of this excellent manual, which your
correspondent J.S. (Vol. iv., p. 410.), in reply to my Query, informed
me had passed through the press of Messrs. Blackwood and Sons, "with a
preface or dissertation containing many particulars relating to the
authoress and her relatives," my object in mentioning the subject in "N.
& Q." has been satisfactorily answered. I am also obliged to J.S. (the
editor, I apprehend, of this new edition) for having corrected the
errors into which I had unintentionally fallen; nor will my neighbour,
the Rev. C.H. Crauford, I am sure, feel less obliged.

It now appears that this new reprint is copied _verbatim et literatim_
from the third impression printed at London, by John Haviland for _Hanna
Barres_, 1625. My Query also has been the means of ascertaining from
another correspondent, P. B. (the initials, I believe, of one of the
most correct of bibliographers in names and dates), a notice of what he
believes to be the _first_ edition printed by John Haviland for _William
Barret_, 1624. But, as Blackwood's edition is dated 1625, and is called
the _third_ edition, is it not very probable that an earlier one
appeared than even that of 1624?

Should the notice I have attracted to Mrs. Joceline's _Mother's
Legacie_, and the letter accompanying it, addressed, "in the immediate
prospect of death, to her truly loving and most dearly beloved husband,"
be the means of extending the sale and the perusal of this beautiful
little pocket volume, "replete with practical wisdom and hallowed
principles, that no human being who is not past feeling can read without
deep emotion," I shall be truly gratified: and it will be another
instance of the utility and value of "N. & Q." being the medium of
bringing such books before the public eye.

    J. M. G.

  Worcester.

_Winifreda; Stevens' "Rural Felicity"_ (Vol. iv., p. 277.).--For a
repetition of the sentiment by Stevens, vide also his "Parent:"

      "A fond father's bliss is to number his race,
      And exult on the bloom that just buds on their face,
      With their prattle he'll dearly himself entertain,
      _And read in their smiles their loved mother again_;
      Men of pleasure be mute, this is life's lovely view,
      When _we look on our young ones our youth we renew_."

      Stevens' _Songs_, Tolly's ed. 1823. p. 223.

    J. B. COLMAN.

  Eye, Nov. 17. 1851.

"_Posie of other Men's Flowers_" (Vol. iv., p. 58.).--A literary friend
of mine has found the passage in _Montaigne_, book iii., chapter 12.,
about three-fourths of the way through it:

  "We invest ourselves with the faculties of others, and let our own
  lie idle: as some one may say to me that I have here only made a
  nosegay of culled flowers, and have brought nothing of my own but
  the thread that ties them together."

    ESTE.

_Abigail_ (Vol. iv., p. 424.).--I have always supposed that the term
"Abigail" had reference to the _handmaid_, who is described in sacred
history as coming before David, and appeasing his wrath. I am far from
wishing, as I am certain all your readers are, together with yourself,
to tamper with holy things. With this understanding, let me therefore
suggest, that other names recorded in the Bible have been used much in
the same way as marking distinctive character. Witness Joseph, Solomon,
Jehu, Job.

    C. I. R.

_Legend of St. Molaisse_ (Vol. ii., p. 79.; Vol. iii., p. 478.).--This
manuscript was purchased for the British Museum, and is MS. Add. 18,205.
Instead of being of the _eleventh_, it is probably of the fourteenth or
fifteenth century.

    μ.

_Collars of SS._ (Vol. iv., pp. 147. 236.).--In compliance with the wish
of MR. E. FOSS, that all information bearing on this subject might be
sent to you, I beg to state that I have carefully examined two monuments
in this neighbourhood on which this ornament appears.

The first is in Macclesfield church. In the north aisle is an
altar-tomb, with the effigies of a knight in plate armour, with a collar
of SS. At his feet is a ball; and under his head, which is uncovered, a
helmet with crest and lambrequin. The crest is too much defaced to be
made out, but in a sketch made in 1584 is figured as a stag's head.
Tradition assigns this tomb to one of the family of Downes; but it is
surrounded by the monumental effigies of the Savages (one being that of
the hero of Bosworth), and bears the arms of Archbishop Savage, who is
said to have repaired it.

The other, which is an exceedingly beautiful monument, and in excellent
preservation, is in the chancel of Barthomley church. It is an embattled
altar-tomb: on the sides are figures, somewhat mutilated, of knights and
ladies, sculptured in bas-relief, under richly crocketted gothic
canopies. The knight is in plate armour, with a coif de mailles and
pointed helmet (_exactly_ of the same character as the effigy of Edward
the Black Prince in Canterbury Cathedral), and wears a collar of SS.
most elaborately carved. It is known as the tomb of Sir Robert
Fulleshurst, one of the four esquires of the gallant James Lord Audley
at the battle of Poictiers, who died in 13 Rich. II. (In Bunbury church,
there is an alabaster altar-tomb to Sir Hugh Calveley, the famous
Captain of "Companions" at the battle of Najara, who died 1394. It is so
exactly similar in every respect, with the exception of the collar of
SS., to that of Sir Robert Fulleshurst, that of the sketches I have made
of both you could not distinguish one from the other.)

There are also said to be effigies bearing the collar of SS. in the
churches of Cheadle, Mottram, Over Peover, and Malpas, of which I will
send you some notice as soon as I have seen them.

    LEWIS EVANS.

  Sandbach, Cheshire.

_Pronunciation of Coke_ (Vol. iv., p. 244.).--In confirmation of the
opinion that his name was pronounced _Cook_, I beg to send you an
extract from the _Life of Sir Edward Coke_, by C. W. Johnson, 1845, vol.
i., p. 336.:--

  "When Coke was sent to the Tower they punned against him in
  English. An unpublished letter of the day has this curious
  anecdote. The room in which he lodged in the Tower had formerly
  been a kitchen; on his entrance the Lord Chief Justice read upon
  the door, 'This room wants a _Cook_.'"

    E. N. W.

  Southwark.

_Use of Misereres_ (Vol. iv., p. 307.).--The following facts may serve
towards deciding the use of "miserere" chairs in old churches. In the
Greek church, near London Wall, every seat is on the miserere
construction. During those parts of the service (and they are very
frequent) where the rubric requires a standing posture, the worshipper
raises the stall to support the person, which it does in a very
sufficient manner.

In the parish church of Mere, in Wiltshire, the "misereres" are
furnished with hooks, to prevent their falling down again when once
elevated.

    RECHABITE.

_Inscription on a Pair of Spectacles_ (Vol. iv., p. 407.).--The words
are evidently all proper names except the third and fourth, _Seel. Erb._
I imagine the words to be German. _Seel._ a contraction for the genitive
(sing. or plur.) of _Selig_, a German euphemism for _late_ (lit.
blessed, happy), and the other word a contraction for _Erbe_ or _Erben_,
heir or heirs. I interpret it, "Peter Conrad Wiegel, heir of the late
John May."

    SC.

  Carmarthen.

_John Lord Frescheville_ (Vol. iv., p. 441.).--In answer to D.'s enquiry
whether there is any proof of this cavalier having been engaged in
Kineton fight, he may be referred to the patent of his peerage, which
refers to his having been present at the first erection of the king's
standard at Nottingham, and to his "many eminent services against the
rebels, as well in the first happy defeate given to the best of their
cavalrye in the fight near Worcester, as at Kineton, Braynford,
Marleborough, Newbery, and at many other places, where he hath received
severall wounds." D. is probably not aware of the very copious memoirs
of this family communicated by Sir Frederick Madden (from Wolley's
_Derbyshire Collections_), and by the Rev. Joseph Hunter to the
_Collectanea Topographica et Genealogica_, vol. iv. 1837.

    N.

_Nightingale and Thorn_ (Vol. iv., pp. 175.242.).--

    "_Edw._ Lorrain, behold the sharpness of this steel:

[_Drawing his sword._]

      Fervent desire, that sits against my heart,
      Is far more thorny-pricking than this blade;
      That, like the nightingale, I shall be scar'd,
      As oft as I dispose myself to rest,
      Until my colours be disploy'd in France:
      This is my final answer, so be gone."

      _Edward III._, a Play, thought to be writ by Shakspeare,
      Act I. Sc. 1.

Of the two editions of _The Raigne of King Edward the Third_, consulted
by Capell before publishing the play in his _Prolusions_, the first was
printed in 1596, the second in 1599.

    C. FORBES.

  Temple.

_Godfrey Higgins's Works_ (Vol. iv., p. 152.).--Perhaps it may not be
uninteresting to OUTIS to know that one of the works of Mr. Higgins
called forth one, whose title I send:

  "Animadversions on a Work entitled 'An Apology for the Life and
  Character of the celebrated Prophet of Arabia called Mohamed or
  the Illustrious, by Godfrey Higgins, Esq.;' with Annotations, by
  the Rev. P. Inchbald, LL.D., formerly of University College,
  Oxford.

      "Ταύτα μὲν οὖν πρὸς τὰς βλασφημίας.

  "Published at Doncaster, 1830."

    H. J.

_Ancient Egypt_ (Vol. iv., p. 152.).--This Query, although partially
answered in Vol. iv., pp. 240. 302., has hitherto received no reply on
the subject of the "Ritual of the Dead." Brugsch has just published the
_Sai an Sinsin, sive Liber Metempsychosis, &c._, from a papyrus in the
Museum at Berlin, with an interlinear Latin translation, and a
_transcript_ of the original in _modern_ characters, in conformity with
the plan which he adopted in his interpretation of the hieroglyphic
portion of the Rosetta Inscription, published in the early part of the
present year. S. P. H. T. will find some of the information he requires
in the _former_, if not in _both_ of these volumes.

    P. Z.

_Crosses and Crucifixes_ (Vol. iv., pp. 422. 485.).--Your correspondent
SIR J. E. TENNENT, in extracting from his volume on _Modern Greece_
(vol. ii. p. 266.), has given fresh currency to a singular error. The
Council of Trullo was cited by him in 1830, and is again quoted as
ordering "that thenceforth fiction and allegory should cease, and _the
real figure of the Saviour be depicted on the tree_;" and we are
referred to _Can. 82. Act. Concil._ Paris, 1714, v. iii., col. 1691,
1692. But should your readers turn to the canons of that council they
would be disappointed at finding nothing about the cross, and one is
curious to know how an historian could have been led into so singular a
mistake. Johnson (see _Clergyman's Vade Mecum_, Part II., p. 283. third
edit.) thus gives the substance of the canon:--

  "82. Whereas, among the venerable pictures, the Lamb is
  represented as pointed at by the finger of his forerunner [John
  the Baptist], which is only a symbol or shadow; we, having due
  regard to the type, but preferring the anti-type, determine that
  he be for the future described more perfectly, and that the
  portraicture of a man be made instead of the old Lamb: that by
  this we may be reminded of His incarnation, life, and death."

And though I have not the precise edition at hand to which SIR J. E.
TENNENT refers, yet on turning to Labbé, I find that Johnson has
correctly epitomized the canon in question.

  "In nonnullis venerabilium imaginum picturis, agnus qui digito
  præcursoris monstratur, depingitur, qui ad gratiæ figuram
  assumptus est, verum nobis agnum per legem Christum Deum nostrum
  præmonstrans. Antiquas ergo figuras et umbras, ut veritatis signa
  et characteres ecclesiæ traditos, amplectentes, gratiam et
  veritatem præponimus, eum ut legis implementum suscipientes. Ut
  ergo quod perfectum est, vel colorum expressionibus omnium oculis
  subjiciatur, ejus qui tollit peccata mundi, Christi Dei nostri
  humana forma characterem etiam in imaginibus deinceps pro veteri
  agno erigi ac depingi jubemus: ut per ipsum Dei verbi
  humiliationis celsitudinem mente comprehendentes, ad memoriam
  quoque ejus in carne conversationis, ejus passionis et salutaris
  mortis deducamur, ejusque quæ ex eo facta est mundo
  redemptionis."--_Labbé, Sacros. Concil._ t. vi., p. 1177. Paris,
  1671.

    W. DN.

_Rotten Row_ (Vol. i., p. 441.; Vol. ii., p. 235.).--May I be allowed to
re-open the question as to the origin of this name, by suggesting that
it may arise from the woollen stuff called _rateen_? A "Rateenrowe"
occurs in 1437 in Bury St. Edmund's, which was the great cloth mart of
the north-eastern parts of the kingdom; and where, at the same time,
were a number of rows named after trades, as "Lyndraper Row," "Mercer's
Row," "Skynner Rowe," "Spycer's Rowe," &c. What is the earliest known
instance of the word?

    BURIENSIS.

_Borough-English_ (Vol. iv., pp. 133. 214. 235. 259.).--Watkins'
_Copyholds_ furnishes in its appendix a list of the customs of different
manors, and therein specifies those which are subject to the custom of
Borough-English. With regard to there being any instance on record of
its being carried into effect in modern times, there must not be a
mistake between the custom which now exists, and that which some authors
assert was the origin of it. The custom is, that the youngest son
inherits in exclusion of his eldest brothers; this is exercised, or it
could not exist. But the custom to which reference has been made, as
having been stated by some authors to be the origin of the existing
custom of Borough-English, is not mentioned by Littleton as such. He
gives a different reason, namely:

  "Because the younger son, by reason of his tender age, is not so
  capable as the rest of his brethren to provide for himself."

And Blackstone adduces a third from the practice of the Tartars, among
whom, on the authority of Father Duhalde, he states that this custom of
descent to the youngest son also prevails, and gives it in these
words:--

  "That nation is composed totally of shepherds and herdsmen; and
  the elder sons, as soon as they are capable of leading a pastoral
  life, migrate from their father with a certain allotment of
  cattle, and go to seek a new habitation. The youngest son,
  therefore, who continues latest with the father, is naturally the
  heir of his house, the rest being already provided for. And thus
  we find that among many other northern nations, it was the custom
  for all the sons but one to migrate from the father, which one
  became his heir. So that possibly this custom, wherever it
  prevails, may be the remnant of that pastoral state of our British
  and German ancestors, which Cæsar and Tacitus describe."

    T. COPEMAN.

  Aylsham, Norfolk.

_Tonge of Tonge_ (Vol. iv., p. 384.).--This very ancient family did not
become extinct, as conjectured by your correspondent J. B. (Manchester).
Jonathan Tonge of Tonge, gent., by will, dated Sept. 7, 1725, devised
his estate "to be sold to the best purchaser," and appointed his brother
Thomas Tonge, gent., who had a family, one of his executors. In the year
following, the whole estate was purchased for 4350_l._ by Mr. John
Starky of Rochdale, a successful attorney, in whose representative it is
now vested. The Tonges deduced their descent from Thomas de Tonge,
_probably_ a natural son of Alice de Wolveley (herself the heiress of
the family of Prestwich of Prestwich), living 7 Edw. II. 1314, as
appears by an elaborate pedigree of the family (sustained by original
evidences), in my possession, and at the service of J. B.

    F. R. R.

  Milnrow Parsonage.

_Queen Brunéhaut_ (Vol. iv., p. 193.).--"That monster queen Brunéhaut!"
For these two centuries there have been writers, beginning with
Pasquier, and apparently gathering weight and influence, who are by no
means disposed to bestow that epithet upon Brunéhaut, whose executioners
were monsters certainly at any rate.

    C. B.

"_Essex Broad Oak_" (Vol. v., p. 10.).--In "the Forest," two or three
miles from Bishop Stortford, is the ruin of an old oak, from which the
parish no doubt takes its name of Hatfield Broad Oak. There is a print
of this tree in Arthur Young's _Survey of Essex_.

If the rural readers of "N. & Q." will observe whether the finest
specimens of oaks have their acorns growing, on long or short stalks
(_quercus sessiliflora_ or _pedunculata_), they might throw much light
on the questions, Have we two distinct English oaks? and, if so, Which
makes the largest and best timber? The timber used inside old buildings,
and erroneously often called chesnut, is supposed to be the sessiliflora
variety of oak, placed inside because it is not so durable as the
quercus pedunculata. But I have been lately informed this variety is in
Sussex selected, as the best, for Portsmouth Dockyard!

In the year 1783 my grandfather first drew attention to the two
varieties of English oaks, in the _Gentleman's Magazine_, p. 653. He was
brother of Gilbert White of Selborne, and an equally acute observer of
Nature. Loudon, in his _Arboretum_, has collected much information, but
has left the question pretty much where it was seventy years since.
Surely it is time we knew precisely what is the tree of which our wooden
walls are made.

    A. HOLT WHITE.

  Brighton.

_Frozen Sounds and Sir John Mandeville_ (Vol. iii., pp. 25. 71.).--Your
correspondent M. A. LOWER says with truth, that the passage about frozen
voices was not to be found in the knight's published work; but neither
he nor any other of your contributors seems to have found the original
of it. In the _Tatler_, No. 254., the illustrious Isaac Bickerstaff
informs us that some manuscripts of Mandeville's and of Ferdinand Mendis
Pinto's, not hitherto included in their published works, had come into
his hands, from which he purposed making extracts from time to time; and
then proceeds to give us the identical story which your correspondent J.
M. G. appears to have taken for a real bit of Mandeville, in ignorance
or forgetfulness of its origin: for I cannot suppose any one so dull as
to take the passage in the _Tatler_ in sober earnest. Steele no doubt
took the story from Rabelais or Plutarch, and fathered it upon one whose
name (much better known than his works) had become proverbial as that of
a liar.

    J. S. WARDEN.

  Balica.

_Separation of Sexes in Church_ (Vol. ii., p. 94.).--In Christ Church,
Birmingham, the males are (or were) separated from the females, which
gave rise to the following lines, which I quote from Allen's _Guide to
Birmingham_:

      "The churches and chapels we generally find,
      Are the places where men unto women are join'd;
      But at Christ Church, it seems, they are more cruel-hearted,
      For men and their wives are brought there to be parted."

    ESTE.

_Deep Wells_ (Vol. iv., p. 492.).--Besides streams and sunk wells, there
is of course another source of water arising from natural springs; and
there are some on both sides of the Banstead Down, which are very
considerable. The chief, probably, is the source of the River Wandle, at
Carshalton, pronounced (with the same omission of the _r_ which P. M. M.
notices) as if it was spelt _Case-_, or _Cays-horton_.

But there is a very strong one at Merstham. These are both at the foot
of the Chalk hills. P. M. M. does not mention the geological causes on
which the relations between wells or springs depend. About thirty-five
years ago the spring at Merstham, which feeds a considerable spring,
failed, and there was a great dispute whether it was owing to
excavations in the neighbourhood. An action was brought, which decided
that it was not attributable to them; upon which I believe Mr. Webster
and Mr. Phillips, eminent geological authorities, were examined, and
which led, perhaps, to their respective accounts, in the _Geological
Transactions_, of the structure of that valley. The story was, that,
after having gained the cause, the proprietor of the quarries said, "I
think we may let them have their water back again." Certain it is that
after some time the water did return.

The Galt clay almost everywhere underlies chalk: this at Merstham is 200
feet thick, and upon the pitch and situation of it many apparently
strange phenomena of wells would depend, as is noticed with regard to
another clay stratum at Norton St. Philips, near Bath, in Conybeare and
Phillips' _Geology_.

There are very deep wells throughout the London clay, and other beds
below it, perhaps, at Wimbledon and at Richmond Park. The deep well at
Carisbrook Castle is well known. That is in the chalk; and where, the
chalk being thrown into a vertical position, it may be still farther to
the bottom of it.

    C. B.

_Dictionary of Hackneyed Quotations_ (Vol. iv., p. 405.).--I am glad to
find, from the communication by H. A. B., that a book of the above
description is likely to appear. The want of such a book has long been
felt, and its appearance will fill up a gap in literature: how it could
so long have escaped the notice of publishers is a mystery. "Though lost
to sight, to memory dear," the author of which H. A. B. inquires for,
is, I think, not likely to be found in any author. My impression is,
that it cannot be traced up to any definite source: I remember it only
as a motto on a seal which was in my possession nearly thirty years ago.

    MANCUNIUM.

  Manchester.

_Macaulay's Ballad of Naseby_ (Vol. iv., p. 485.).--It was reprinted by
Charles Knight in the _last_ (or _octavo_) series of the _Penny
Magazine_, vol. ii., p. 223. With it is the companion called "The
Cavalier's March to London." It will not be very easy for authors to
shake off their juvenile productions, while "N. & Q." is in existence;
nor need Mr. Macaulay be ashamed of these ballads. They are spirited,
and pleasant to read.

    M.

_Ducks and Drakes_ (Vol. iv., p. 502.).--An extract from Mr. Bellenden
Ker's account of the origin and meaning of these words, will answer M.
W. B.'s question in the affirmative.

  DUCKS AND DRAKES.

  "As the boys play by skimming a flat stone along the surface of
  the water; so as to cause it to make as many bounds or ricochets
  as the skimmer's strength and dexterity can enforce. The
  superiority, in the play, is decided by the greatest number of
  times the stone touches and bounds upon the surface, in
  consequence of the way it is slung from the hand of the performer.
  _D'hach's aen der reyckes_ q.e. _the hazard_ [_event_] _is upon
  the touches_; the issue of the game depends upon the number of
  bounds [separate touchings] made on the surface of the water. When
  we say, _he has made ducks and drakes of his money_, it is merely
  in the sense of, he has thrown it away childishly and hopelessly;
  and the stone is the boy's throw for a childish purpose, and sinks
  at the end of its career, to be lost in the water."--_Essay on the
  Archæology of our Popular Phrases and Nursery Rhymes_, vol. ii.,
  p. 140.

    C. FORBES.

  Temple.

_John Holywood, the Mathematician_ (Vol. iii., p. 389.).--I do not
observe that any one has replied to the Query of DR. RIMBAULT, as to the
birth-place of _John Holywood, the Mathematician_. I presume he means
_Johannes a Sacrobosco_, who died in Paris A.D. 1244, and was the author
of the treatise _De Sphærâ_ and other works. In Harris's _History of the
County of Down_: Dublin, 1744., p. 260., a claim to the honour of his
birth is made on behalf of the town of Holywood, about four miles from
Belfast, where he is said to have been a brother of the order of the
Franciscans, who had a friary there. Some of the sculptured stones of
the building may still be seen in the walls of the ruined church which
stands upon its site; and its lands form part of the estate of Lord
Dufferin and Clandeboy.

    J. EMERSON TENNENT.

  London.

_Objective and Subjective_ (Vol. v., p. 11.)--From the tone of X.'s
inquiry into the meaning of this antithesis, it is tolerably plain that
no answer will make _him_ confess that it is intelligible; yet it was
familiar in the best times of our philosophical literature, and the
words, according to this, their philosophical opposition, occur in
Johnson's _Dictionary_. I think it is desirable to avoid this
phraseology, but the meaning of it may be made clear enough to any one
who wishes to understand it. The _object_ on which man employs his
senses or his thoughts, are distinct enough from the man himself, the
_subject_ in which the senses and the thoughts exist. Several years ago
an Edinburgh Reviewer complained that Germans, and Germanized
Englishmen, were beginning to use _objective_ and _subjective_ for
_external_ and _internal_. This is a sort of rough approximation to the
meaning of the terms. But perhaps the distinction is better illustrated
by examples. We call Homer an objective, Lucan a subjective, poet,
because the former tells his story about external objects and wants,
interposing little which belongs to himself. Lucan, on the other hand,
is perpetually introducing reflections arising from the internal
character of his own mind. Objective truth is language which agrees with
the facts, correctness. Subjective truth is language which agrees with
the convictions of the speaker, veracity.

Perhaps X. will allow me to ask in turn, what is "a physical ignoramus,"
the character in which he begs some of your intelligent readers to
enlighten him.

I have said above that I think this mode of expressing the antithesis
better avoided; I will state why. It puts the man who thinks, and the
objects about which he thinks, side by side, as if they were alike and
co-ordinate. It implies the view of some one who can look at both of
them; whereas, the thing to be implied is the opposition between being
looked at and looking. Hence _subjective_ is a bad word; a man is not,
in ordinary language, the _subject_ of his own senses or of his own
thoughts, merely because they are in him. The antithesis would be better
expressed in many cases, by the words _objective_ and _mental_, or
_objective_ and _cogitative_. But different words would be eligible in
different cases.

    W. W.

_Plant in Texas_ (Vol. iv., pp. 208. 332.).--In turning over some papers
I found the following paragraph:

  "Major Alvord has discovered a singular plant of the Western
  Prairies, said to possess the peculiarity of pointing north and
  south, and to which he has given the name of Silphium Laciniatum.
  No trace of iron has been discovered in the plant; but, as it is
  full of resinous matter, Major Alvord suggests that its polarity
  may be due to electric currents."

    JOHN C. WHISTAIR.

_Lord Say and Printing_ (Vol. iv., p. 344.).--In Milman's edition of
_Gibbon's Autobiography_, there occurs a passage respecting his
ancestor, Lord Treasurer Say, from which it appears that the great
historian doubted the accuracy of Shakspeare's allusion (which he
quotes). I have not the book with me, or I would refer MR. FRAZER to the
page. I think Gibbon would not have rested content with a mere assertion
of his opinion, if a fact so creditable to his ancestor's understanding
were capable of proof.

    NICÆENSIS.

_Age of Trees_ (Vol. iv., pp. 401. 448.).--Since the note on the age of
trees appeared, my attention has been called to a discussion of the
subject in an article on Decandolle's _Vegetable Physiology_, written I
believe by Prof. Henslow, in the _Foreign Quarterly Review_, vol. xi. p.
368-71. With respect to the yew near Fountains Abbey, he remarks as
follows:

  "In the first of these examples, we have the _testimony of
  history_ for knowing that this tree was in existence, and must
  have been of considerable size, in the year 1133, _it being
  recorded_ that the monks took shelter under it whilst they were
  rebuilding Fountains Abbey."--p. 369.

Query: Where is this historical testimony to be found? Nothing is said
on the subject in the account of Fountains Abbey in Dugdale's
_Monasticon_, vol. v., p. 286. ed. 1825.

With respect to the Shelton Oak (Vol. iv., p. 402.) the movements of
Owen Glendower, at the time of the battle of Shrewsbury, are accurately
detailed in the life of him inserted in Pennant's _Tours in Wales_, vol.
iii., p. 355. (ed. 1810); and the account there given is inconsistent
with the story of his having ascended a tree in order to count Percy's
troops. It appears that at the time of the battle he was at Oswestry, at
the head of 12,000 men.

Lord Campbell, in his _Lives of the Chief Justices_, describes the
suicide of Sir William Hankford, Chief Justice in the reigns of Henry V.
and VI., who is said to have contrived to get himself shot at night by
his own keeper. Lord Campbell quotes Prince, the author of the _Worthies
of Devon_, p. 362. as stating that--

  "This story is authenticated by several writers, and the constant
  traditions of the neighbourhood; and I, myself, have been shown
  the rotten stump of an old oak under which he is said to have
  fallen, and it is called _Hankford's Oak_ to this day."--See
  _Lives of the Chief Justices_, vol. i., c. 4. p. 140.

    L.

_Grimes-dyke_ (Vol. iv., p. 454.)--Your correspondents appear to have
overlooked _Offandíc_, _Wodnesdíc_ (so often mentioned in the Saxon
charters), and _Esendike_--doubtless so named in memory of Esa, the
progenitor of the kings of Bernicia--and _Gugedíke_, which I suspect is
an old British form for Gog's dike (Fr. _Yagiouge_), as well as
_Grimanleáh_ (Wood of Horrors), and _Grimanhyl_. It is true we find the
_Grimsetane-gemáero_ in Worcestershire (_Cod. Dipl._, No. 561.); but we
also find _Wódnesbeorg_ (_Id._ No. 1035.). Allow me to give you the
substance of a remark of Professor H. Léo of Halle on this subject.
(_Ang. Säch. Ortsnamen_, p. 5.)

  "Wild, dismal places are coupled with the names of grim, fabulous
  creatures: thus, in Charter 957, King Eadwig presented to Odo,
  Archbishop of Canterbury, a territorial property at 'Hel-ig' (on
  the Islet of Helas). A morass is cited which is called, after the
  ancient mythological hero, _Grindles-mère_; a pit,
  _Grindles-pytt_; a small islet surrounded with water--which was to
  an Anglo-Saxon a "locus terribilis"--was called _Thorn-ei_ (the
  thorn tree being of ill omen). And thus, in order to express the
  ordinary associations connected with neighbourhood, recourse was
  had rather to mythic personages, than to abstract expressions."

I would here observe that the _Ortsnamen_ has been for some time in
course of translation, with the Professor's sanction and assistance,
with a view to its publication in England.

    B. WILLIAMS.

  Hillingdon.

_Petition respecting the Duke of Wellington_ (Vol. iv., pp. 233.
477.).--E. N. W. is assured that the petition for the recall of the Duke
of Wellington was presented. Being too ill to travel several miles to a
public library, I can only refer to works in which a reference to it
will be found. In No. XIX. of the late _British and Foreign Quarterly_,
published by Messrs. Taylor, Red Lion Court, Fleet Street, is an extract
from the admirable letter of his Grace to Lord Liverpool on the subject;
and in Colonel Gurwood's edition of the _Wellington Dispatches_, on
which the article alluded to is written, and which contains much
interesting matter relating to his Grace not to be found any where else,
is the whole dispatch. I asked for information relative to the petition,
because I had heard that it had been destroyed, and it was too droll a
document to be allowed to be lost.

    ÆGROTUS.

_Countess of Desmond_ (Vol. iv., pp. 305. 426.).--_Tour in Scotland_,
fourth edition of Pennant's works. Mine was Dr. Latham's copy.

Description of print of Catherine, Countess of Desmond, quite correct as
to face, hair, and cloak. There is no button, but over the breast it is
laced. In the inside of the black hood is a damask pattern waved with
flowers.

    C. J. W.

_Woman torn to pieces by Wild Cats as a Punishment for Infanticide_
(Vol. iii., p. 91.).--In the _Wonders of the Universe, or Curiosities of
Nature and Art_, vol. ii., p. 555., will be found the account of this
affair. The culprit was named Louise Mabrée, a midwife in Paris; the
corpses of no less than sixty-two infants were found in and about her
house: she was sentenced to be shut up in an iron cage with sixteen wild
cats, and suspended over a slow fire. When the cats became infuriated
with heat and pain, they turned their rage upon her; and after
thirty-five minutes of the most horrible sufferings, put an end to her
existence,--the whole of the cats dying at the same time, or within two
minutes after. This occurred in 1673.

    J. S. WARDEN.

  Balica, Oct. 1851.

"_Racked by pain, by shame confounded_" (Vol. iv., p. 7.).--These are
the commencing lines of a short original poem called "The Negro's
Triumph." It is to be found in the _Parent's Poetical Anthology_, edited
by Mrs. Mant, p. 231. 5th edition, 1849.

    T. H. KERSLEY, B.A.

_Blessing by Hand_ (Vol. iii., pp. 477. 509.).--Some drawings and
descriptions of the modes of blessing by the hand are to be found, in
the "Dictionary of Terms of Art," published in one of the early numbers
of the _Art Journal_ for this year.

    ESTE.

_Verses in Latin Prose_ (Vol. iv., p. 382.).--A. A. D. will surely thank
me, if his Note on the subject do not contain it, for the _rationale_,
which Sir Thomas Brown gives, _Religio Medici_, Part ii. p. 9., of the
occurrence of verses in Latin prose:

  "I will not say with Plato, the soul is an harmony, but
  harmonical, and hath its nearest sympathy unto music: thus some,
  whose temper of body agrees, and humours the constitution of their
  souls, are born poets, though indeed all are naturally inclined
  unto rhythm. This made Tacitus, in the very first lines of his
  story, fall upon a verse (_Urbem Romam in principio regis
  habuere_); and Cicero, the worst of poets, but declaiming for a
  poet, falls, in the very first sentence, upon a perfect hexameter:
  _In quā me non inficior mediocriter esse_."

    C. W. B.

_Blakloanæ Hæresis_ (Vol. iv., pp. 193. 239. 240.).--As I was the
querist concerning this work and its author, and wanted the information,
I was very thankful for the satisfactory answers given. The books
referred to by R. G. are not inaccessible: whether then it be needful to
occupy your columns with the "particulars" required by E. A. M. (Vol.
iv., p. 458.) may be a query too. The first word of the title is as
above (not Blackloanæ, as your correspondents have it). E. A. M. will
find that Blacklow, or Blakloe, is a soubriquet, as well as Lominus.

P. S.--On examining the book, however, I am not convinced that Peter
Talbot was its "real author," though extensive use is made of what he
had written; or that "Lominus" is an "imaginary divine," even if the
name be a feigned one. On what ground do these assertions rest?

    S. W. RIX.

  Beccles.

_Quaker Bible_ (Vol. iv., pp. 87. 412.).--A MEMBER OF THE SOCIETY OF
FRIENDS, who writes on the subject of a _Quaker Expurgated Bible_,
appears to be unaware of the existence of a work once (I believe) well
known in that body. This was an epitome or compendium of the Bible by
John Kendall; it contained the greater portion of the Word of God, such
parts being excluded as the editor did not consider profitable. It is
probably to this book that the authoress of _Quakerism_ refers; I have,
however, never seen her work. This mutilated Bible of John Kendall was
frequently to be met with formerly in the houses of members of the
Society of Friends; as I have not seen it for more than twenty years, I
cannot tell what its exact date may be; it was, however, published in
the days when all religious publications of the Society of Friends
_were_ subject to the approval of a committee. In 1830, George Witley
published a list of those chapters in the Bible which were "suitable"
for reading in "Friends'" families; amongst other portions he excluded
(I believe) the 16th of Leviticus and Psalm xxii. In _private_ he
thought the whole might be read; but he says that he prepared this index
because of having heard _very unsuitable_ matter read aloud! This
information may be new to your correspondent.

    SIMONIDES.

_Wyle Cop_ (Vol. iv., pp. 116. 243. 509.).--E. H. D. D. is in error; the
Wyle Cop at Shrewsbury is _not_ an artificial bank, but a natural
eminence overlooking the Severn; and I cannot agree with him in the
immateriality of the meaning attached to _Wyle_. The associations
connected with names are frequently of great topographical and
historical value. There are many singular names of streets, &c., in
Shrewsbury, which I should be glad if any of your correspondents can
interpret, such as "Mardol," "Shop latch," "Bispestanes," and "Dogpole;"
also the derivation of "Shut" in the sense of _passage_ or entry, a
synonym with the Liverpool "Wient," which seems equally uncertain.

    Βολις.




Miscellaneous.


NOTES ON BOOKS, SALES, CATALOGUES, ETC.

If it be true, as we are inclined to believe, that there is no one
subject in the whole wide range of speculative studies, to which the
well-worn saying of Hamlet, that there are more things true than are
dreamt of in our philosophy, may be applied with so much propriety as
Animal Magnetism,--so we are also inclined to believe that a perusal of
the two volumes recently published by Mr. Colquhoun under the title of
_An History of Magic, Witchcraft, and Animal Magnetism_, will tend to
convince our readers that to the same subject may be applied the yet
older saying, that there is nothing new under the sun. Mr. Colquhoun,
who many years since published his _Isis Revelata_, has long been a
diligent inquirer into the nature and origin of the different phenomena
of animal magnetism; and it would appear from the work before us, he has
also been a persevering reader of all the various accounts of magic,
witchcraft, and other so-called popular delusions, recorded by the
writers of antiquity, and the chroniclers of the middle ages; as well as
of those more modern mysteries (such as the Gustavus Adolphus Story,
the Death of Ganganelli, &c.) which seem to increase in interest just in
proportion as they approach to our own _more enlightened_ days. As in
all the extraordinary tales which he brings forward, our author sees
only manifestations of well-known mesmeric phenomena, it may well be
imagined that, in recording the result of these examinations and
studies, he has probed two volumes which, if they do not satisfy all our
requirements upon the subject, will be found of most considerable
interest, not only to all who believe in Animal Magnetism, but to all
who care to investigate the nature of the human mind, its organization,
and the laws which govern its action.

The success which has attended the publication of Mr. Buckley's
translation of _The Canons and Decrees of the Council of Trent_, and the
approbation bestowed upon that work by several of the highest
dignitaries of the English Church, have led him to publish _The
Catechism of the Council of Trent translated into English with Notes_;
and there can be little doubt, from the anxiety which now exists to
learn, from sources which cannot be disputed, both the points on which
we differ from Rome, and those on which we agree with Rome, that the
success which followed Mr. Buckley's translation of the Decrees will be
extended to his English version of the _Catechism of the Council of
Trent_.

BOOKS RECEIVED.--_The Pathway of the Fawn, a Tale of the New Year_, by
Mrs. T.K. Hervey. A charming and appropriate tale for a New Year's Gift,
written as it is with exquisite taste and a most benevolent intent, and
set off with a number of capital illustrations by G.H. Thomas. _Jubilee
Edition of the Complete Works of King Alfred the Great_, Part I. This
first part of what is intended to be a complete translation of the works
of our great Alfred, comprises a prefatory notice of what the whole work
is to contain, and a harmony of the chroniclers during the life of King
Alfred, that is to say, from A.D. 849 to A.D. 901.


BOOKS AND ODD VOLUMES

WANTED TO PURCHASE.

CH. THILLON (DE HALLE) NOUVELLE COLLECTION DES APOCRYPHES, Leipsic,
1832.

THEOBALD'S SHAKSPEARE RESTORED, ETC. 4to. 1726.

A SERMON preached at Fulham in 1810 by the REV. JOHN OWEN of Paglesham,
on the death of Mrs. Prowse, Wicken Park, Northamptonshire (Hatchard).

FÜSSLEIN, JOH. CONRAD, BEYTRÄGE ZUR ERLÄUTERUNG DER
KIRCHEN-REFORMATIONS-GESCHICHTE DES SCHWEITZERLANDES, 5 Vols. Zurich,
1741.

CONCORDIA DISCORS. By GRASCOME.

  [Star symbol] Letters, stating particulars and lowest price,
  _carriage free_, to be sent to MR. BELL, Publisher of "NOTES AND
  QUERIES," 186. Fleet Street.


Notices to Correspondents.

_We are unavoidably compelled to postpone until next week many special
answers to correspondents._

REPLIES RECEIVED.--_Objective and Subjective--Ave Trici, &c.--Rev.
John Paget--Barrister--First Paper Mill in England--Inveni
Portum--Parish Registers--Wyle Cop--John Bull--Cleanliness next to
Godliness--Abigail--The Serpent represented with a Human
Head--Ploydes--Isabel, Queen of the Isle of Man--Caxton
Memorial--St. Bene't--Ancient Custom of Interment--Ivory Medallion
of Lord Byron--Perpetual Lamp--Parallel Passages--Dial
Mottoes--Difficult Passages--Pasquinade--Lines on the Bible--Greek
Names of Fishes--Log Book--Richly deserved--Cooper's Miniature of
Cromwell--Bentley Family, and many others which are in type._

_Full price will be given for clean copies of_ No. 19. _upon application
to our Publisher._

_Copies of our_ Prospectus, _according to the suggestion of_ T. E. H.,
_will be forwarded to any correspondent willing to assist us by
circulating them._

"NOTES AND QUERIES" _is published at noon on Friday, so that the Country
Booksellers may receive Copies in that night's parcels, and deliver them
to their Subscribers on the Saturday._

_The_ INDEX to Volume IV. _will be ready for delivery with our next
Number._




LONDON LIBRARY, 12. St. James's Square.

  Patron: His Royal Highness Prince ALBERT.

  This Institution now offers to its members a collection of 60,000
  volumes, to which additions are constantly making, both in English
  and foreign literature. A reading room is also open for the use of
  the members, supplied with the best English and foreign
  periodicals.

  Terms of admission--entrance fee, 6_l._; annual subscription,
  2_l._; or entrance fee and life subscription, 26_l._

  By order of the Committee.

  J. G. COCHRANE, Secretary and Librarian. September, 1851.


THE FAMILY ALMANACK and EDUCATIONAL REGISTER for 1852, besides the usual
Contents of an Almanack, contains full and complete accounts of all the
Universities, Colleges and Grammar Schools in the Kingdom, including
Masters' Names, Number and Value of Scholarships, Amount of Endowment,
and a great variety of particulars respecting Education at Home and
Abroad. Thick post 8vo., price 4_s._


WHITAKER'S CLERGYMAN'S DIARY and ECCLESIASTICAL CALENDAR for 1852,
contains, besides the Diary, every variety of Information necessary for
Clergymen; forming the most Complete Clerical Pocket-Book ever
published. Price in cloth, 3_s._; roan, 5_s._; morocco, 6_s._ 6_d._

  London: JOHN HENRY PARKER, 377. Strand.


NEW WORKS

  NOW READY.

  I.

  RECOLLECTIONS of the LITERARY LIFE of MARY RUSSELL MITFORD, Author
  of "Our Village," &c. 3 vols. 31_s._ 6_d._

  II.

  The LIFE and TIMES of DANTE. By COUNT CESARE BALBO. Edited, with
  an Introduction, by Mrs. BUNBURY. 2 vols. 21_s._

  III.

  A RIDE OVER THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS TO CALIFORNIA. By the Hon. HENRY
  COKE, Author of "Vienna in 1848," &c. 8vo. 14_s._

  IV.

  SOLWAN; or, WATERS of COMFORT. By M. AMARI. Rendered into English
  by the Translator of "The Sicilian Vespers," &c. 2 vols. 21_s._

  RICHARD BENTLEY, New Burlington St.

  Publisher in Ordinary to HER MAJESTY.


Just issued (by Post, 1 stamp each).

  WILLIAMS and NORGATE'S GERMAN BOOK CIRCULAR, Nos. 28, 29.

  A List of New Publications, Second-Hand Books, and Books Reduced
  in Price. Purchasers of German Books, applying direct to Williams
  and Norgate, will in future be charged the same price as charged
  in Germany; viz., at the rate of Three Shillings for the Prussian
  Thaler, for all books published in States with which England has
  an International Copyright Treaty, embracing almost the entire
  North of Germany (with occasional rare exceptions).

  14. Henrietta Street, Covent Garden.


This day is published, neatly bound in cloth, gilt edges, 4_s._ 6_d._

  THE MOTHER'S LEGACIE

  TO HER

  UNBORNE CHILDE.

  BY ELIZABETH JOCELINE.

  Reprinted from the Edition of 1625, with a Biographical and
  Historical Introduction.

  WILLIAM BLACKWOOD & SONS, Edinburgh and London.


CHRONICLES of the ANCIENT BRITISH CHURCH, previous to the arrival of St.
Augustine, A. D. 596. Second Edition. Post 4to. price 5_s._ cloth.

    "A work of great utility to general readers."--_Morning Post._

    "The result of much reading and careful
    research."--_Metropolitan._

    "The author has collected with much industry and care all the
    information which can throw light on his subject."--_Guardian._

    "Not unworthy the attention of our clerical friends."--_Notes and
    Queries_, ii. 453.

  GLEANINGS from BRITISH and IRISH ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY. By the
  Hon. BARBARA BEDFORD. 5_s._ 6_d._

  A GLOSSARY to the OBSOLETE and UNUSUAL WORDS and PHRASES of the
  HOLY SCRIPTURES in the Authorised English Version. By J. JAMESON.
  2_s._ 6_d._

  THE BIBLE STUDENT'S GUIDE to the more correct Understanding of the
  English Translation of the OLD TESTAMENT, by reference to the
  Original Hebrew. By the Rev. W. WILSON, D.D., Canon of Winchester.
  Demy 4to., 2_l._ 2_s._, cloth.

    N.B.--An Index is added of the rendering of every Hebrew Word in
    the Old Testament.

  London: WERTHEIM & MACINTOSH, 24. Paternoster Row, and of all
  Booksellers.


Just published, 8vo. cloth, pp. 240, price 10_s._ 6_d._ handsomely
printed on fine paper at the Dublin University Press,

  THE UNRIPE WINDFALLS IN PROSE AND VERSE of JAMES HENRY, M.D.

  CONTENTS: Miscellaneous Poems; Criticism on the style of Lord
  Byron, in a Letter to the Editor of "Notes and Queries;" Specimen
  of Virgilian Commentaries; Specimen of a New Metrical Translation
  of the Eneis.

  London: GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street.


BIBLES AND BIBLICAL WORKS FOR PRESENTATION.

  BAGSTER'S POLYGLOT BIBLES.

  The elegant manner in which these well-known Books are got up,
  renders them especially eligible as PRESENTATION COPIES of the
  "Sacred Scriptures." Bound in Bagster's peculiar style of flexible
  Turkey morocco; of durable beauty, and enriched with every
  external adornment, their typographical completeness is enhanced.
  The Miniature Polyglot, or small pocket size, the Foolscap Octavo,
  pocket size, and the Facsimile Large-Print Edition, all correspond
  page for page, and in their combinations with the Book of Common
  Prayer, Indexes, Concordances, Lexicons, etc., afford a variety
  suited to every requirement. The "Comprehensive Family and Pulpit
  Bible," containing the largest number of parallel references and
  illustrative notes ever published, is kept, of various quarto
  sizes, bound up with Family Registers, in plain and sumptuous
  bindings. The "Hexapla" is a treasury of the most condensed
  criticism. It consists of the Greek Text of the New Testament,
  printed in the largest type, with six standard English
  translations beneath it, arranged for comparison in parallel
  columns. Kept in every style of best binding. "The Bible of Every
  Land," now just completed, is a collection of interesting Memoirs
  of every Language into which the Bible has been translated, with
  engraved Specimens, numerous coloured Maps, and a full series of
  Native Alphabets. "The Blank Paged Bible," "The Biblia Ecclesiæ
  Polyglotta," "The Large-Print Critical Greek Testament and
  Septuagint" may also be suggested as suitable gifts. See
  descriptive Catalogues, which are furnished without charge, and
  sent free by post.

  London: SAMUEL BAGSTER AND SONS, 15. Paternoster Row, where, and
  at most respectable Booksellers in the Kingdom, a large assortment
  may be seen.

  MULTÆ TERRICOLIS LINGUÆ, COELESTIBUS UNA.

  Πολλαι μεν θνητοις Γλωτται, μια δ' Αθανατοισιν.

PROVIDENT LIFE OFFICE,

  50. REGENT STREET.

  CITY BRANCH: 2. ROYAL EXCHANGE BUILDINGS.

  Established 1806.

  Policy Holders' Capital, 1,192,818_l._

  Annual Income, 150,000_l._--Bonuses Declared, 743,000_l._

  Claims paid since the Establishment of the Office, 2,001,450_l._

      _President._

      The Right Honorable EARL GREY.

      _Directors._

      The Rev. James Sherman, _Chairman_.
      H. Blencowe Churchill, Esq., _Dep.-Chairman_.
      Henry B. Alexander, Esq.
      George Dacre, Esq.
      William Judd, Esq.
      Sir Richard D. King, Bart.
      The Hon. Arthur Kinnaird
      Thomas Maugham, Esq.
      William Ostler, Esq.
      Apsley Pellatt, Esq.
      George Round, Esq.
      Frederick Squire, Esq.
      William Henry Stone. Esq.
      Capt. William John Williams.
      J.A. Beaumont, Esq., _Managing Director_.

  _Physician_--John Maclean, M.D. F.S.S., 29. Upper Montague Street,
  Montague Square.

  NINETEEN-TWENTIETHS OF THE PROFITS ARE DIVIDED AMONG THE INSURED.

  Examples of the Extinction of Premiums by the Surrender of
  Bonuses.

      Date of Policy. 1806
      Sum Insured. £2500
      Original Premium. £79  10  10 Extinguished
      Bonuses added subsequently, to be further interested annually.
          £1222   2   0

      Date of Policy. 1811
      Sum Insured. £1000
      Original Premium. £ 33  19   2 Ditto [Extinguished]
      Bonuses added subsequently, to be further interested annually.
           £231  17   8

      Date of Policy. 1818
      Sum Insured. £1000
      Original Premium. £ 34  16  10 Ditto [Extinguished]
      Bonuses added subsequently, to be further interested annually.
           £114  18  10

  Examples of Bonuses added to other Policies.

      Policy No.  521
      Date. 1807
      Sum Insured.  £900
      Bonus added. £982  12  1
      Total with Additions to be further increased. £1882  12  1

      Policy No. 1174
      Date. 1810
      Sum Insured. £1200
      Bonus added. £1160   5  6
      Total with Additions to be further increased. £2360   5  6

      Policy No. 3392
      Date. 1820
      Sum Insured. £5000
      Bonus added. £3558  17  8
      Total with Additions to be further increased. £8558  17  8

  Prospectuses and full particulars may be obtained upon application
  to the Agents of the Office, in all the principal Towns of the
  United Kingdom, at the City Branch, and at the Head Office, No.
  50. Regent Street.


THE BEST is the CHEAPEST.

      The Best Congou Tea            3_s._ 8_d._ per lb.
      The Best Souchong Tea          4_s._ 4_d._   "
      The Best Gunpowder Tea         5_s._ 8_d._   "
      The Best Old Mocha Coffee      1_s._ 4_d._   "
      The Best West India Coffee     1_s._ 4_d._   "
      The Fine True Ripe Rich
          Rare Souchong Tea          4_s._ 0_d._   "

  40_s._ worth or upwards sent CARRIAGE FREE to any part of England
  by

  PHILLIPS & CO., TEA MERCHANTS, No. 8. King William Street, City,
  London.


Now ready, Two New Volumes of

  THE JUDGES OF ENGLAND and the Courts at Westminster. By EDWARD
  FOSS, F.S.A.

      Volume Three, 1272--1377.
      Volume Four,  1377--1485.

  Lately published, price 14_s._ each, cloth,

      Volume One,   1066--1199.
      Volume Two,   1199--1272.

  London: LONGMAN, BROWN, GREEN, and LONGMANS.


WESTERN LIFE ASSURANCE AND

  ANNUITY SOCIETY.

  3. PARLIAMENT STREET, LONDON.

  Founded A.D. 1842.

      _Directors._

      H. Edgeworth Bicknell, Esq.
      William Cabell, Esq.
      T. Somers Cocks, Jun. Esq. M.P.
      G. Henry Drew, Esq.
      William Evans, Esq.
      William Freeman, Esq.
      F. Fuller, Esq.
      J. Henry Goodhart, Esq.
      T. Grissell, Esq.
      James Hunt, Esq.
      J. Arscott Lethbridge, Esq.
      E. Lucas, Esq.
      James Lys Seager, Esq.
      J. Basley White, Esq.
      Joseph Carter Wood, Esq.

      _Trustees._

      W. Whateley, Esq., Q.C.
      L.C. Humfrey, Esq., Q.C.
      George Drew, Esq.

  _Consulting Counsel._--Sir Wm. P. Wood, M.P., Solicitor-General.

  _Physician._--William Rich. Basham, M.D.

  _Bankers._--Messrs. Cocks, Biddulph, and Co., Charing Cross.

  VALUABLE PRIVILEGE.

  POLICIES effected in this Office do not become void through
  temporary difficulty in paying a Premium, as permission is given
  upon application to suspend the payment at interest, according to
  the conditions detailed in the Prospectus.

  Specimens of Rates of Premium for Assuring 100_l._, with a Share
  in three-fourths of the Profits:--

      Age    £  _s._  _d._
       17    1   14    4
       22    1   18    8
       27    2    4    5
       32    2   10    8
       37    2   18    6
       42    3    8    2

  ARTHUR SCRATCHLEY, M.A., F.R.A.S., Actuary.

  Now ready, price 10_s._ 6_d._ Second Edition, with material
  additions, INDUSTRIAL INVESTMENT and EMIGRATION; being a TREATISE
  on BENEFIT BUILDING SOCIETIES, and on the General Principles of
  Land Investment, exemplified in the Cases of Freehold Land
  Societies, Building Companies, &c. With a Mathematical Appendix on
  Compound Interest and Life Assurance. By ARTHUR SCRATCHLEY, M.A.,
  Actuary to the Western Life Assurance Society, 3. Parliament
  Street, London.


Vols. I. and II. now ready.

  Elegantly bound in ultramarine cloth, gilt edges, price 6_s._ each.

  GIRLHOOD OF SHAKSPEARE'S HEROINES. A Series of Fifteen Tales, By
  MARY COWDEN CLARKE. Periodically, in One Shilling Books, each
  containing a complete Story.

      Vol. I. Price 6_s._
      Tale I.  PORTIA:  THE HEIRESS OF BELMONT.
      Tale II.  THE THANE'S DAUGHTER.
      Tale III.  HELENA; THE PHYSICIAN'S ORPHAN.
      Tale IV.  DESDEMONA;  THE MAGNIFICO'S CHILD.
      Tale V.  MEG AND ALICE; THE MERRY MAIDS OF WINDSOR.

      Vol. II. Price 6_s._
      Tale VI.  ISABELLA, THE VOTARESS.
      Tale VII.  KATHARINA AND BIANCA; THE SHREW AND THE DEMURE.
      Tale VIII.  OPHELIA;  THE ROSE OF ELSINORE.
      Tale IX.  ROSALIND AND CELIA; THE FRIENDS.
      Tale X.  JULIET:  THE WHITE DOVE OF VERONA.

      Vol. III. (In progress.)
      Tale XI.  BEATRICE AND HERO; THE COUSINS.
      Tale XII.  OLIVIA;  THE LADY OF ILLYRIA.

  SMITH & CO., 136. Strand; and SIMPKIN & CO., Stationers' Hall Court.


LEXICA

  ON SALE AT WILLIAMS & NORGATE'S.

  +Anglo-Saxon.+--ETTMUELLER (L.), LEXICON ANGLO-SAXONICUM cum
  Synopsis Grammatica. Royal 8vo. 1851, 12_s._

  +Arabic.+--FREYTAG (G. W.), LEXICON ARABICO-LATINUM acced. Index
  Vocum Latinarium. 4 vols. 4to. 2_l._ 5_s._

  ---- Abridged in one volume. 4to. 16_s._

  +Armenian.+--AZARIAN (A. and S.), ARMENIAN, ITALIAN, GREEK, and
  TURKISH DICTIONARY. Royal 8vo. 1848. 18_s._

  +Bohemian+ and GERMAN POCKET DICTIONARY, by JORDAN. 18mo. 1847.
  3_s._ 6_d._

  +Chinese.+--SCHOTT, VOCABULARIUM SINICUM. 4to. 1844. 4_s._

  +Coptic.+--PARTHEY (G.), VOCABULARIUM COPTICO-LAT. et LAT.-COPT.
  8vo 1844. 16_s._

  ---- PEYRON, LEXICON LING. COPTICÆ 4to. 1835. 2_l._ 2_s._

  +Danish.+--FERRALL and REPPS, DANISH and ENGLISH DICTIONARY. Sq.
  4vo. 1845. 7_s._

  ---- ENGLISH and ENGLISH-DANISH POCKET DICTIONARY. 18mo. 3_s._
  6_d._

  +Dutch.+--BOMHOFF, DICTIONARY of the DUTCH and ENGLISH LANGUAGES.
  2 thick vols. 12mo. boards, 1851. 20_s._

  ---- The same abridged in one volume. 1848. 15_s._

  +Finnish.+--RENVALLI (G.), LEXICON LINGUÆ FINNICÆ cum interpret.
  Latin copios. brev. German. 2 vols. in 1. 4to. Aboe. 1826. 21_s._

  +Flemish.+--OLINGER, DICTIONNAIRE FLAMMAND-FRANCAIS et
  FRANCAIS-FLAMMAND. 2 vols. royal 8vo. 1842. 24_s._

  +French.+--BOISTE, DICTIONNAIRE UNIVERSELLE de la LANGUE
  FRANCAISE, avec le Latine et l'Etymologie. 4to. 1847. 18_s._

  ---- FLEMMING AND TIBBINS, GRAND ENGLISH and FRENCH, and FRENCH and
  ENGLISH DICTIONARY. 2 thick volumes, imp. 4to. 2_l._ 12_s._ 6_d._

  +Frisian.+--RICHTHOFEN (K. v.), ALTFRIESISCHES WÖRTERBUCH. 4to.
  1840. (Published at 20_s._), 8_s._

  +German.+--ADELUNG, WÖRTERBUCH der HOCHDEUTSCHEN MUNDART. 4 vols.
  royal 8vo. 1793-1802. (Published at 35_s._), 21_s._

  ---- HEYSE, HANDWÖRTERBUCH der DEUTSCHEN SPRACHE. Complete in 3
  thick vols. 8vo. 1833-49. 24_s._

  +German-English.+--HILPERT'S GERMAN and ENGLISH DICTIONARY. 4
  Vols. 4to. Strongly half-bound morocco (publ. at 4_l._ 12_s._),
  3_l._ 12_s._

  ---- The ENGLISH-GERMAN PART. 2 vols. 4to. Half-bound morocco, in
  one volume, 1_l._ 8_s._

  ---- The GERMAN-ENGLISH PART. 2 vols. 4to. Half-bound morocco, in
  one volume, 2_l._ 8_s._

  ---- FLUGEL'S OWN ENLARGED GERMAN and ENGLISH DICTIONARY,
  containing Forty Thousand Words more than the late London or any
  other edition. 2 very thick vols. 8vo. Cloth lettered. Leipsic.
  (Published in Germany at 2_l._ 5_s._), 1_l._ 11_s._ 6_d._

  +Gothic.+--GABELENTZ u. LOEBE, GLOSSARIUM der GOTHISCHEN SPRACHE.
  4to. 1843. 13_s._ 6_d._

  ---- SCHULZE, GOTHISCHES GLOSSAR mit Vorrede v. JAC. GRIMM. 4to.
  1848. 18_s._

  +Greek.+--BENFEY, GRIECHISCHES WURZEL-LEXICON. 2 vols. 8vo.
  1839-42. (Publ. at 27_s._), 13_s._ 6_d._

  ---- PLANCHÉ, DICTIONNAIRE GREC-FRANCAIS. Composé sur le Thesaurus
  de H. Etienne. Royal 8vo. cloth, 1845. 17_s._ 6_d._

  +Greek (Modern).+--SCHMIDT, DICTIONNAIRE
  GREC--MODERNE--FRANCAIS--ALLEMAND. 8vo. 1838. 8_s._

  +Hebrew; Chaldae.+--GESENIUS, LEXICON MANUALE HEBRÆIC. et CHALD.
  Ed 2 Royal 8vo. 1848. 14_s._ 6_d._

  ---- GESENIUS, THESAURUS PHILOLOG. CRIT. LING. HEBRÆÆ et CHALDEÆ.
  Vols I. to III. Part I. (all out). 4to. 1828-42. (Publ. at 3_l._
  4_s._), 1_l._ 15_s._

  ---- KIMCHI (RAB. DAV.) RADICUM LIBER, seu Hebræum Bibliorum
  Lexicon. 4to. 1848. 15_s._

  +Hungarian.+--BLOCH, UNGARISCH u. DEUTSCHES WÖRTERBUCH. 2 vols.
  8vo. 1848. 12_s._

  +Icelandic.+--HALDERSON (B.), LEXICON, ICELANDICO-LATINO-DANICUM
  cur. RASK. 2 vols. 4to. 1814. 1_l._ 9_s._

  +Illyrian.+--VOLTIGGI, ILLYRIAN ITALIAN-GERMAN DICTIONARY and
  GRAMMAR. 610 pages. 8vo. Vienna. 6_s._ 6_d._

  +Italian.+--BUTTURA, DICTIONNAIRE ITALIEN-FRANÇAIS et FRANÇ.-ITAL.
  2 vols. 8vo. 1832. 10_s._

  +Jakutsh.+--BÖHTLING (O.), WÖRTERBUCH, GRAMMATIK, TEXT ÜBER DIE
  SPRACHE DER JAKUTEN. 4to. Petersb. 1851. 20_s._

  +Japanese.+--PFIZMAIER, WÖRTERBUCH DER JAPANES. SPRACHE
  (Japanese-German-English). Part I. Fol. 1851. 23_s._

  +Javanese.+--GERICKE, JAVAANSCH-NEDERDUITSCH WOORDENBOEK uitg. d.
  T. ROORDA. Royal 8vo. bds. 1848. 2_l._ 5_s._

  +Lapland.+--IHRE, LEXICON LAPPONICUM, Gramm. Lapp. auct. 4to.
  1780. 30_s._

  +Latin.+--FREUND (W.), WÖRTERBUCH DER LATEIN, SPRACHE. 4 vols.
  royal 8vo. (5,000 pages). 1846. (Publ. at 4_l._) 2_l._ 6_s._

  +Lithuanian.+--NESSELMANN, WÖRTERBUCH DER LITTHAUISCHEN SPRACHE.
  Royal 8vo. 1851. 10_s._ 6_d._

  +Malay.+--WILDE (A. de), NEDERL. MALAEISCH-SONDASCH. WOERDENBOEK.
  8vo. 1841. 10_s._ 6_d._

  +Mongol.+--SCHMIDT, MONGOLISCH-DEUTSCH-RUSSISCH. WÖRTERBUCH. 4to.
  1835. 1_l._ 8_s._

  +Norse.+--AASEN (J.), ORDBOG over det NORSKE FOLKESPROG. Royal
  8vo. 1850. 10_s._

  +Ossetic.+--SJÖGREN, OSSETISCH-DEUTSCH u. DEUTSCH-OSSETISCHES
  WÖRTERBUCH, mit Grammatik. 4to. Petersb. 1844. 12_s._

  +Persian.+--SAMACHSCHARI, LEXICON ARABICUM-PERSICUM atque
  INDICEM-ARABICUM, adj. WETZSTEIN. 4to. bds. 1850. 27_s._

  +Polish-English+ and ENGLISH-POLISH DICTIONARY, compiled from
  Linde, Mrongovius, &c. 2 vols. royal 8vo. 1851. 20_s._

  +Polyglot.+--REEHORST, POLYGLOT MARINER'S and MERCHANT'S
  DICTIONARY, in English, Dutch, German, Danish, Swedish, French,
  Italian, Spanish, Portuguese, and Russian. Obl. 8vo. (Publ. at
  20_s._) 5_s._

  +Russian.+--HEYM, DICTIONNAIRE RUSSE, FRANÇAIS et ALLEMANDE.
  Second Edition. 3 vols. 8vo. 1844. 1_l._ 7_s._

  ---- RUSSIAN-ENGLISH and ENGLISH-RUSSIAN POCKET-DICTIONARY. 1846.
  3_s._ 6_d._

  +Sanscrit.+--BOPP (F.), GLOSSARIUM SANSCRITUM COMPARATIV. 4to.
  1847. 20_s._

  ---- WESTERGAARD, RADICES LINGUÆ SANSCRITÆ. Royal 8vo. 1841.
  (Publ. at 34_s._) 12_s._

  +Slavonic (Old).+--NICKLOSICH (F.), LEXICON LINGUÆ SLOVENICÆ
  VETERIS DIALECTI. 4to. 1850. 12_s._

  +Swedish+ and ENGLISH POCKET-DICTIONARY. 16mo. 1845. 3_s._ 6_d._

  +Syriac.+--CASTELLI, LEXICON SYRIACUM. ed. MICHAELIS. 2 vols. 4to.
  1788. (Publ. at 22_s._ 6_d._) 6_s._

  +Teutonic.+--GRAFF, ALTHOCHDEUTSCHER SPRACHSCHATZ od. WÖRTERBUCH
  der ALTDEUTSCHEN SPRACHE. 7 Vols. 4to. (Publ. at 7_l._) 2_l._
  12_s._ 6_d._

  ---- MEIDINGER, DICTIONNAIRE COMPARATIF et ETYMOLOGIQUE des
  LANGUES TEUTO-GOTHIQUES. Royal 8vo. 1836. 12_s._

  ---- ZIEMANN (A.), MITTELHOCH-DEUTSCHES WÖRTERBUCH, nebst gram.
  Einleitung. Royal 8vo. 1828. (Publ. at 17_s._ 6_d._) 8_s._

  +Tibetan.+--SCHMIDT, TIBETANISCH-DEUTSCHES WÖRTERBUCH. 4to.
  Petersb. 1841 28_s._

  14. HENRIETTA STREET, COVENT GARDEN.


MESSRS. RIVINGTON

  HAVE JUST PUBLISHED THE FOLLOWING BOOKS.

  THE APOCALYPSE; with NOTES and REFLECTIONS.

    LEADING CONTENTS: 1. The Great High Priest; or, Christ's Presence
    in his Church.--2. The Sealed Book; or, Prophetic History of the
    Church.--3. The Book eaten by St. John; or, Mysteries of the
    Church.--4. The Vials; or, Judgments of God.--5. The Vision of
    Babylon; or, the Unfaithful Church.--6. Scenes in Heaven; or,
    Christ with his Elect.--7. The Heavenly Jerusalem; or, the Church
    Triumphant. In small 8vo. 8_s._ 6_d._ By the Rev. ISAAC WILLIAMS,
    B.D., late Fellow of Trinity College, Oxford; Author of a "Harmony
    of the Gospels," in 8 volumes.

  A DEVOTIONAL COMMENT on the MORNING and EVENING SERVICE in the
  BOOK of COMMON PRAYER, in a Series of Plain Lectures. By JOHN
  JAMES, D.D., Canon of Peterborough, Author of a "Comment on the
  Collects." In 2 vols. 12mo. 15_s._

  A GIFT at CONFIRMATION; a Selection of POEMS in Illustration of
  the SERVICE. Edited by the Author of "Aids to Development,"
  "Memorials of Two Sisters," "Governess Life," &c. In a Pocket
  Volume. 6_s._

  SOPHOCLIS OEDIPUS TYRANNUS. With ENGLISH NOTES, from Schneidewin,
  translated from the German by the Rev. HENRY BROWNE, M.A.,
  Prebendary of Chichester. (Forming a Volume of ARNOLD'S SCHOOL
  CLASSICS.) In 12mo. 4_s._

    Also, edited by the Rev. T.K. ARNOLD, with English Notes
    (uniformly printed),

    1. THE AJAX OF SOPHOCLES, 3_s._--2. The PHILOCTETES, 3_s._--3.
    ÆSCHINES' ORATION against CTESIPHON, 4_s._--4. THUCYDIDES, Book I.
    5_s._ 6_d._

  PLAIN SERMONS on the LATTER PART of the CATECHISM; being the
  Conclusion of the Series contained in the Ninth Volume of "Plain
  Sermons." By the Rev. ISAAC WILLIAMS, B.D., late Fellow of Trinity
  College, Oxford. In 8vo. 6_s._ 6_d._

    [Star symbol] The Complete Series of Sermons on the CATECHISM may
    be had in one volume. Price 13_s._

  The First HEBREW BOOK; on the Plan of "Henry's First Latin Book."
  By the Rev. THOMAS KERCHEVER ARNOLD, M.A., Rector of Lyndon, and
  late Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge. In 12mo. 7_s._ 6_d._

  ECLOGÆ OVIDIANÆ, Part II., containing Selections from the
  METAMORPHOSES. With ENGLISH NOTES. By the Rev. THOMAS KERCHEVER
  ARNOLD, M.A., Rector of Lyndon, and late Fellow of Trinity
  College, Cambridge. In 12mo. 5_s._

    Also, by the same Editor,

    ECLOGÆ OVIDIANÆ, Part I. Seventh Edition. 2_s._ 6_d._

  The ENGLISH BEE-KEEPER; or, Suggestions for the Practical
  Management of AMATEUR and COTTAGE APIARIES, on Scientific
  Principles. With Illustrative Notes. By a COUNTRY CURATE, Author
  of a Series of Papers on Bees in "The Cottage Gardener." In 12mo.
  4_s._ 6_d._

  The THEOLOGICAL CRITIC; a Quarterly Journal. Edited by the Rev.
  THOMAS KERCHEVER ARNOLD. M.A., Rector of Lyndon, and late Fellow
  of Trinity College, Cambridge. This Journal embraces Theology in
  its widest acceptation, and several articles of each Number are
  devoted to Biblical Criticism.

    Nos. I. to IV. are already published, price 4_s._ each.

    Also, the FIRST VOLUME, with Index, price 16_s._ 6_d._

  LETTERS on some of the ERRORS of ROMANISM, in CONTROVERSY with
  NICHOLAS WISEMAN, D.D. By WILLIAM PALMER, M.A., Prebendary of
  Sarum, and Vicar of Whitchurch Canonicorum. New Edition, revised.
  In 18mo. 4_s._ 6_d._

  A PRACTICAL INTRODUCTION to LATIN VERSE COMPOSITION.

    CONTENTS.

    1. "Ideas" for Hexameter and Elegiac Verses. 2. Alcaics. 3.
    Sapphics. 4. The other Horatian Metres. 5. Appendix of Poetical
    Phraseology, and Hints on Versification. By the Rev. THOMAS
    KERCHEVER ARNOLD, M.A., Rector of Lyndon, and late Fellow of
    Trinity College, Cambridge. Third Edition. In 8vo. 5_s._ 6_d._

  SICKNESS; its TRIALS and BLESSINGS. Third Edition. In small 8vo.
  6_s._ An APPENDIX is added (which may be had separately),
  containing Suggestions to Persons in Attendance on the Sick and
  Dying.

  The Second Edition of the SONGS of the BIRDS, or the Analogies of
  Animal and Spiritual Life. By the Rev. W. E. EVANS, M.A.,
  Prebendary of Hereford, and Author of "Family Prayers." In small
  8vo. 5_s._ 6_d._

  The Second Edition of a TRANSLATION of the EPISTLES of CLEMENS
  ROMANUS, IGNATIUS, and POLYCARP and of the APOLOGIES of JUSTIN
  MARTYR and TERTULLIAN. With Notes, and an Account of the Present
  State of the Question respecting the Epistles of Ignatius. By the
  Rev. TEMPLE CHEVALLIER, B.D., Professor of Mathematics in the
  University of Durham. In 8vo. 12_s._

  The THREE PATHS; or, TRUTH, VANITY, and PROFESSION: a Tale. By the
  Hon. Mrs. ANDERSON. In 2 vols. small 8vo. 12_s._

  HISTORY of the CHURCH of ENGLAND, from the REVOLUTION to LAST ACTS
  of CONVOCATION, 1688--1717. By the Rev. WILLIAM PALIN, M.A.,
  Rector of Stifford, Essex. Small 8vo. 8_s._ 6_d._

  The CHERRY-STONES; or, CHARLTON SCHOOL: a Tale for Youth; partly
  from the MSS. of the late Rev. WILLIAM ADAMS, M.A., Author of the
  "Shadow of the Cross," &c. Edited by the Rev. H. C. ADAMS, M.A.
  Second Edition. 3_s._ 6_d._

  CARE of the SOUL; or, Sermons on Points of Christian Prudence. By
  WILLIAM EDWARD HEYGATE, M.A., Author of "The Wedding Gift." 12mo.
  5_s._ 6_d._

  NOTES of a RESIDENCE in the CANARY ISLANDS, the SOUTH of SPAIN,
  and ALGIERS; illustrating the STATE of RELIGION in those
  Countries. By the Rev. THOMAS DEBARY, M.A. In post 8vo. 8_s._
  6_d._

  THE ENGLISH ORDINAL; its History, Validity, and Catholicity. With
  an Introduction on the Three Holy Orders of Ministers in the
  Church. By the Rev. MACKENZIE E.C. WALCOTT, M.A., Curate of St.
  James's, Westminster. In post 8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._

  The PHILIPPIC ORATIONS of DEMOSTHENES. Edited from the best Text,
  with ENGLISH NOTES, and Grammatical References. By the Rev. THOMAS
  KERCHEVER ARNOLD, M.A., Rector of Lyndon, and late Fellow of
  Trinity College, Cambridge. In 12mo. 4_s._

    Also, by the same Editor, with English Notes, uniformly printed,

    1. OLYNTHIAC ORATIONS of DEMOSTHENES. 3_s._

    2. The ORATION of DEMOSTHENES on the CROWN. 4_s._ 6_d._

  A HISTORY of the ARTICLES of RELIGION: to which is added a SERIES
  of DOCUMENTS, from A.D. 1536 to A.D. 1615; together with
  Illustrations from Contemporary Sources. By CHARLES HARDWICK,
  M.A., Fellow of St. Catharine's Hall, Cambridge, and Whitehall
  Preacher. In 8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._

  The Third Edition of the First GERMAN BOOK; on the Plan of
  "Henry's First Latin Book." By the Rev. THOMAS KERCHEVER ARNOLD,
  M.A., Rector of Lyndon, and late Fellow of Trinity College,
  Cambridge; and J. W. FRÄDERSDORFF, PH. DR., of the
  Taylor-Institute, Oxford. In 12mo. 5_s._ 6_d._         [Now ready.

    [Star symbol] A KEY to the EXERCISES may be had, price 2_s._ 6_d._

  The Second Edition of the MINISTRY of the BODY. By the Rev. ROBERT
  WILSON EVANS, B.D., Vicar of Heversham, and late Fellow of Trinity
  College, Cambridge, Author of "The Rectory of Valehead." In small
  8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

  SCRIPTURE INSPIRATION; or, Discourses on the CANON of the OLD and
  NEW TESTAMENT, and on the APOCRYPHA; Preached at the Hulsean
  Lecture. By CHRISTOPHER WORDSWORTH, D.D., Canon of Westminster.
  Second Edition. In 8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._

  HOMER for BEGINNERS; containing THE ILIAD, Books I.--III., with
  ENGLISH NOTES; forming a sufficient Commentary for Young Students.
  By the Rev. THOMAS KERCHEVER ARNOLD, M.A., Rector of Lyndon, and
  late Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge. In 12mo. 3_s._ 6_d._

    Also, by the same Editor,

    HOMERI ILIAS, Lib. I.--IV., with a COPIOUS CRITICAL INTRODUCTION
    and ENGLISH NOTES. In 12mo. 7_s._ 6_d._

  RIVINGTONS, St. Paul's Church Yard, and Waterloo Place, Pall Mall.




Printed by THOMAS CLARK SHAW, of No. 8. New Street Square, at No. 5 New
Street Square, in the Parish of St. Bride, in the City of London; and
published by George Bell, of No. 186. Fleet Street, in the Parish of St.
Dunstan in the West, in the City of London, Publisher, at No. 186. Fleet
Street aforesaid.--Saturday, January 10. 1852.




[Transcriber's Note: List of volumes and content pages in "Notes and
Queries", Vol. I.-V.]

      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. I.                                   |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol., No.     | Date, Year        | Pages     | PG # xxxxx  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No.  1 | November  3, 1849 |   1 -  17 | PG #  8603  |
      | Vol. I No.  2 | November 10, 1849 |  18 -  32 | PG # 11265  |
      | Vol. I No.  3 | November 17, 1849 |  33 -  46 | PG # 11577  |
      | Vol. I No.  4 | November 24, 1849 |  49 -  63 | PG # 13513  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No.  5 | December  1, 1849 |  65 -  80 | PG # 11636  |
      | Vol. I No.  6 | December  8, 1849 |  81 -  95 | PG # 13550  |
      | Vol. I No.  7 | December 15, 1849 |  97 - 112 | PG # 11651  |
      | Vol. I No.  8 | December 22, 1849 | 113 - 128 | PG # 11652  |
      | Vol. I No.  9 | December 29, 1849 | 130 - 144 | PG # 13521  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 10 | January   5, 1850 | 145 - 160 | PG #        |
      | Vol. I No. 11 | January  12, 1850 | 161 - 176 | PG # 11653  |
      | Vol. I No. 12 | January  19, 1850 | 177 - 192 | PG # 11575  |
      | Vol. I No. 13 | January  26, 1850 | 193 - 208 | PG # 11707  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 14 | February  2, 1850 | 209 - 224 | PG # 13558  |
      | Vol. I No. 15 | February  9, 1850 | 225 - 238 | PG # 11929  |
      | Vol. I No. 16 | February 16, 1850 | 241 - 256 | PG # 16193  |
      | Vol. I No. 17 | February 23, 1850 | 257 - 271 | PG # 12018  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 18 | March     2, 1850 | 273 - 288 | PG # 13544  |
      | Vol. I No. 19 | March     9, 1850 | 289 - 309 | PG # 13638  |
      | Vol. I No. 20 | March    16, 1850 | 313 - 328 | PG # 16409  |
      | Vol. I No. 21 | March    23, 1850 | 329 - 343 | PG # 11958  |
      | Vol. I No. 22 | March    30, 1850 | 345 - 359 | PG # 12198  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 23 | April     6, 1850 | 361 - 376 | PG # 12505  |
      | Vol. I No. 24 | April    13, 1850 | 377 - 392 | PG # 13925  |
      | Vol. I No. 25 | April    20, 1850 | 393 - 408 | PG # 13747  |
      | Vol. I No. 26 | April    27, 1850 | 409 - 423 | PG # 13822  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 27 | May       4, 1850 | 425 - 447 | PG # 13712  |
      | Vol. I No. 28 | May      11, 1850 | 449 - 463 | PG # 13684  |
      | Vol. I No. 29 | May      18, 1850 | 465 - 479 | PG # 15197  |
      | Vol. I No. 30 | May      25, 1850 | 481 - 495 | PG # 13713  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. II.                                  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol., No.      | Date, Year         | Pages   | PG # xxxxx  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 31 | June  1, 1850      |   1- 15 | PG # 12589  |
      | Vol. II No. 32 | June  8, 1850      |  17- 32 | PG # 15996  |
      | Vol. II No. 33 | June 15, 1850      |  33- 48 | PG # 26121  |
      | Vol. II No. 34 | June 22, 1850      |  49- 64 | PG # 22127  |
      | Vol. II No. 35 | June 29, 1850      |  65- 79 | PG # 22126  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 36 | July  6, 1850      |  81- 96 | PG # 13361  |
      | Vol. II No. 37 | July 13, 1850      |  97-112 | PG # 13729  |
      | Vol. II No. 38 | July 20, 1850      | 113-128 | PG # 13362  |
      | Vol. II No. 39 | July 27, 1850      | 129-143 | PG # 13736  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 40 | August  3, 1850    | 145-159 | PG # 13389  |
      | Vol. II No. 41 | August 10, 1850    | 161-176 | PG # 13393  |
      | Vol. II No. 42 | August 17, 1850    | 177-191 | PG # 13411  |
      | Vol. II No. 43 | August 24, 1850    | 193-207 | PG # 13406  |
      | Vol. II No. 44 | August 31, 1850    | 209-223 | PG # 13426  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 45 | September  7, 1850 | 225-240 | PG # 13427  |
      | Vol. II No. 46 | September 14, 1850 | 241-256 | PG # 13462  |
      | Vol. II No. 47 | September 21, 1850 | 257-272 | PG # 13936  |
      | Vol. II No. 48 | September 28, 1850 | 273-288 | PG # 13463  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 49 | October  5, 1850   | 289-304 | PG # 13480  |
      | Vol. II No. 50 | October 12, 1850   | 305-320 | PG # 13551  |
      | Vol. II No. 51 | October 19, 1850   | 321-351 | PG # 15232  |
      | Vol. II No. 52 | October 26, 1850   | 353-367 | PG # 22624  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 53 | November  2, 1850  | 369-383 | PG # 13540  |
      | Vol. II No. 54 | November  9, 1850  | 385-399 | PG # 22138  |
      | Vol. II No. 55 | November 16, 1850  | 401-415 | PG # 15216  |
      | Vol. II No. 56 | November 23, 1850  | 417-431 | PG # 15354  |
      | Vol. II No. 57 | November 30, 1850  | 433-454 | PG # 15405  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 58 | December  7, 1850  | 457-470 | PG # 21503  |
      | Vol. II No. 59 | December 14, 1850  | 473-486 | PG # 15427  |
      | Vol. II No. 60 | December 21, 1850  | 489-502 | PG # 24803  |
      | Vol. II No. 61 | December 28, 1850  | 505-524 | PG # 16404  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. III.                                 |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol., No.       | Date, Year        | Pages   | PG # xxxxx  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 62 | January  4, 1851  |   1- 15 | PG # 15638  |
      | Vol. III No. 63 | January 11, 1851  |  17- 31 | PG # 15639  |
      | Vol. III No. 64 | January 18, 1851  |  33- 47 | PG # 15640  |
      | Vol. III No. 65 | January 25, 1851  |  49- 78 | PG # 15641  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 66 | February  1, 1851 |  81- 95 | PG # 22339  |
      | Vol. III No. 67 | February  8, 1851 |  97-111 | PG # 22625  |
      | Vol. III No. 68 | February 15, 1851 | 113-127 | PG # 22639  |
      | Vol. III No. 69 | February 22, 1851 | 129-159 | PG # 23027  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 70 | March  1, 1851    | 161-174 | PG # 23204  |
      | Vol. III No. 71 | March  8, 1851    | 177-200 | PG # 23205  |
      | Vol. III No. 72 | March 15, 1851    | 201-215 | PG # 23212  |
      | Vol. III No. 73 | March 22, 1851    | 217-231 | PG # 23225  |
      | Vol. III No. 74 | March 29, 1851    | 233-255 | PG # 23282  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 75 | April  5, 1851    | 257-271 | PG # 23402  |
      | Vol. III No. 76 | April 12, 1851    | 273-294 | PG # 26896  |
      | Vol. III No. 77 | April 19, 1851    | 297-311 | PG # 26897  |
      | Vol. III No. 78 | April 26, 1851    | 313-342 | PG # 26898  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 79 | May  3, 1851      | 345-359 | PG # 26899  |
      | Vol. III No. 80 | May 10, 1851      | 361-382 | PG # 32495  |
      | Vol. III No. 81 | May 17, 1851      | 385-399 | PG # 29318  |
      | Vol. III No. 82 | May 24, 1851      | 401-415 | PG # 28311  |
      | Vol. III No. 83 | May 31, 1851      | 417-440 | PG # 36835  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 84 | June  7, 1851     | 441-472 | PG # 37379  |
      | Vol. III No. 85 | June 14, 1851     | 473-488 | PG # 37403  |
      | Vol. III No. 86 | June 21, 1851     | 489-511 | PG # 37496  |
      | Vol. III No. 87 | June 28, 1851     | 513-528 | PG # 37516  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. IV.                                  |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol., No.       | Date, Year         | Pages   | PG # xxxxx |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No.  88 | July  5, 1851      |   1- 15 | PG # 37548 |
      | Vol. IV No.  89 | July 12, 1851      |  17- 31 | PG # 37568 |
      | Vol. IV No.  90 | July 19, 1851      |  33- 47 | PG # 37593 |
      | Vol. IV No.  91 | July 26, 1851      |  49- 79 | PG # 37778 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No.  92 | August  2, 1851    |  81- 94 | PG # 38324 |
      | Vol. IV No.  93 | August  9, 1851    |  97-112 | PG # 38337 |
      | Vol. IV No.  94 | August 16, 1851    | 113-127 | PG # 38350 |
      | Vol. IV No.  95 | August 23, 1851    | 129-144 | PG # 38386 |
      | Vol. IV No.  96 | August 30, 1851    | 145-167 | PG # 38405 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No.  97 | Sept.  6, 1851     | 169-183 | PG # 38433 |
      | Vol. IV No.  98 | Sept. 13, 1851     | 185-200 | PG # 38491 |
      | Vol. IV No.  99 | Sept. 20, 1851     | 201-216 | PG # 38574 |
      | Vol. IV No. 100 | Sept. 27, 1851     | 217-246 | PG # 38656 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No. 101 | Oct.  4, 1851      | 249-264 | PG # 38701 |
      | Vol. IV No. 102 | Oct. 11, 1851      | 265-287 | PG # 38773 |
      | Vol. IV No. 103 | Oct. 18, 1851      | 289-303 | PG # 38864 |
      | Vol. IV No. 104 | Oct. 25, 1851      | 305-333 | PG # 38926 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No. 105 | Nov.  1, 1851      | 337-358 | PG # 39076 |
      | Vol. IV No. 106 | Nov.  8, 1851      | 361-374 | PG # 39091 |
      | Vol. IV No. 107 | Nov. 15, 1851      | 377-396 | PG # 39135 |
      | Vol. IV No. 108 | Nov. 22, 1851      | 401-414 | PG # 39197 |
      | Vol. IV No. 109 | Nov. 29, 1851      | 417-430 | PG # 39233 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No. 110 | Dec.  6, 1851      | 433-460 | PG # 39338 |
      | Vol. IV No. 111 | Dec. 13, 1851      | 465-478 | PG # 39393 |
      | Vol. IV No. 112 | Dec. 20, 1851      | 481-494 | PG # 39438 |
      | Vol. IV No. 113 | Dec. 27, 1851      | 497-510 | PG # 39503 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. V.                                   |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol., No.       | Date, Year         |  Pages  | PG # xxxxx |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. V  No. 114 | January 3, 1852    |   1-18  | PG # 40171 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol I. Index. [Nov. 1849-May 1850]             | PG # 13536 |
      | INDEX TO THE SECOND VOLUME. MAY-DEC., 1850     | PG # 13571 |
      | INDEX TO THE THIRD VOLUME. JAN.-JUNE, 1851     | PG # 26770 |
      | INDEX TO THE FOURTH VOLUME. JULY-DEC., 1851    | PG # 40166 |
      +------------------------------------------------+------------+





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes and Queries, Vol. V, Number 115,
January 10, 1852, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES AND QUERIES, JAN 10, 1852 ***

***** This file should be named 40582-0.txt or 40582-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/0/5/8/40582/

Produced by Charlene Taylor, Jonathan Ingram and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Library of Early Journals.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
