The Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes and Queries, Vol. V, Number 116,
January 17, 1852, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Notes and Queries, Vol. V, Number 116, January 17, 1852
       A Medium of Inter-communication for Literary Men, Artists,
       Antiquaries, Genealogists, etc.

Author: Various

Editor: George Bell

Release Date: September 1, 2012 [EBook #40642]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES AND QUERIES, JAN 17, 1852 ***




Produced by Charlene Taylor, Jonathan Ingram and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Library of Early Journals.)





[Transcriber's note: Original spelling variations have not been
standardized. Characters with macrons have been marked in brackets with
an equal sign, as [=m] for a letter m with a macron on top.
_Underscores_ have been used to indicate _italic_ fonts; +plus+ signs
indicate +bold+ fonts. Notes and Queries, Index of Volume 4,
July-December, 1851, has been made available separately as PG ebook
#40166. A list of volumes and pages in "Notes and Queries" has been
added at the end.]




NOTES AND QUERIES:

A MEDIUM OF INTER-COMMUNICATION

FOR

LITERARY MEN, ARTISTS, ANTIQUARIES, GENEALOGISTS, ETC.

"When found, make a note of."--CAPTAIN CUTTLE.

VOL. V.--No. 116.

SATURDAY, JANUARY 17. 1852.

With Index, Price Tenpence. Stamped Edition, 11_d._




CONTENTS.

                                                                Page


      NOTES:--

      Mechanical Arrangements of Books                            49

      Caxton Memorial, by Beriah Botfield                         51

      Settle's Female Prelate, or Pope Joan; a Tragedy, by
      James Crossley                                              52

      Historical Bibliography                                     52

      Calamities of Authors                                       55

      Folk Lore:--Valentine's Day; Superstition in
      Devonshire--Fairies                                         55

      Minor Notes:--Lines in Whispering Gallery at Gloucester
      Cathedral--Definition of Thunder--Greek Epigram
      by an uncertain Author                                      56

      QUERIES:--

      Burning of the Jesuitical Books at Paris, by
      H. Merivale                                                 56

      Grantham Altar Case                                         56

      Meaning of Groom, by E. Davis Protheroe                     57

      Minor Queries:--Gregentius and the Jews in Arabia
      Felix--King Street Theatre--Lesteras and Emencin--Epigram on
      Franklin and Wedderburn--Plenius and his Lyrichord--Epigram
      on Burnet--Dutch Chronicle of the World--"Arborei foetus
      alibi, atque iniussa virescunt Gramina" (Virgil G.
      I. 55.)--History of Brittany--Serjeants' Rings--The Duchess
      of Cleveland's Cow-pox--Arms of Manchester--Heraldical
      MSS. of Sir Henry St. George Garter                         58

      MINOR QUERIES ANSWERED:--The Pelican, as a Symbol
      of the Saviour--Bishop Coverdale's Bible--Age of the
      Oak--Olivarius--Vincent Bourne's Epilogus in Eunuchum
      Terentii--Burton, Bp., Founder of Schools, &c.,
      at Loughborough, co. Leicester--Hoo                         59

      REPLIES:--

      Modern Names of Places                                      61

      Proverbial Philosophy; Parochial Library at Maidstone,
      by John Branfill Harrison                                   61

      "A Breath can make them as a Breath has made"               62

      Bogatzky                                                    63

      Moravian Hymns                                              63

      Replies to Minor Queries:--Inveni portum--Quarter
      Waggoner--Cibber's Lives of the Poets--Poniatowski
      Gems--Dial Motto at Karlsbad--Passage in Jeremy
      Taylor--Aue Trici and Gheeze Ysenoudi--Rev. John
      Paget--Lines on the Bible--Dial Mottoes--Martial's
      Distribution of Hours--Nelson's Signal--Cooper's
      Miniature, &c.--Roman Funeral Pile--Barrister--Meaning
      of Dray--Tregonwell Frampton--Vermin,
      Parish Payments of, &c.--Alterius Orbis Papa--Dido
      and Æneas--Compositions during the Protectorate             64

      MISCELLANEOUS:--

      Notes on Books, Sales, Catalogues, &c.                      69

      Books and Odd Volumes wanted                                70

      Notices to Correspondents                                   70

      Advertisements                                              70




Notes.


MECHANICAL ARRANGEMENTS OF BOOKS.

All persons who, whatever might be their motive, have followed any
subject of literary research, must be aware of the extent to which their
labours are facilitated or retarded by the mechanical arrangements of
books, such as the goodness of paper, the legibility of type, the size
of volumes, the presence or absence of table of contents, indexes, and
other means of reference. It is in the possession of these conveniences
that the capabilities of typography, and its superiority over
manuscript, mainly consist. I propose now to set down a few remarks on
this subject, in the hope that any means, however trifling they may
seem, by which literary knowledge is rendered more commodious and
accessible, will not be deemed unworthy of attention by your readers.

With regard to the form of printed letters, it is difficult to conceive
any improvement in modern typography, as practised in Italy, France, and
England. This is equally true of Roman and Greek characters. The Greek
types introduced by Porson leave nothing to be desired. The Germans
still to a great extent retain the old black-letter type for native
works, which was universal over all the north of Europe in the early
period of printing, and is not a _national_ type, as some persons seem
to imagine. These letters being imitated from the manuscript characters
of the fifteenth century, are essentially more indistinct than the Roman
type, and have for that reason been disused by the rest of Europe,
Holland and Denmark not excepted. In England this antiquated mode of
printing was long retained for law-books, and, till a comparatively
recent date, for the statutes. The Anglo-Saxon letters are in like
manner nothing but a barbarous imitation of old manuscript characters,
and have no real connexion with the Anglo-Saxon language. Their use
ought to be wholly abandoned (with the exception of those which are
wanting in modern English). Roman numerals, likewise, as being less
clear and concise than Arabic numerals, especially for large numbers,
ought to be discarded, except in cases where it is convenient to
distinguish the volume from the page, and the book from the chapter.
English lawyers, indeed, who in general have only occasion to cite the
volume and page, invariably make their quotations with Arabic figures,
by prefixing the number of the volume, and subjoining the number of the
page. Thus, if it were wished to refer to the 100th page of the second
volume of _Barnewall and Alderson's Reports_, they would write _2 B. &
C. 100_. Roman numerals are still retained for the sections of the
statutes.

Akin to the retention of antiquated forms of letters is the retention of
antiquated orthography. Editors of works of the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries sometimes retain the spelling of the period, of
which Evelyn's _Diary_ is an example; but this practise is unpleasant to
the modern reader, and sometimes, particularly in proper names,
perplexes and misleads him. The modern editions of the classical writers
of that period, such as Shakspeare, Bacon, Milton, Clarendon, &c., are
very properly reduced to the modern standard of orthography, as is done
by Italian editors with the works of Dante, Boccaccio, &c. The attempt
to introduce the native orthography of foreign proper names naturalised
in English, is likewise unsuccessful, and merely offends the eye of the
reader, without giving any real information. Mr. Lane and other
Orientalists will never succeed in banishing such forms as _vizier_,
_caliph_, _cadi_, &c., nor will even Mr. Grote's authority alter the
spelling of the well-known Greek names. Names of ancient persons and
places which are enshrined in the verses of Milton and other great
poets, cannot be altered.

The old unmeaning practice of printing every noun substantive with a
capital letter (still retained in German) has been abandoned by every
English printer, except the printer of parliamentary papers for the
House of Lords. Proper names used to be printed in italics; and
generally, the use of italics was much greater than at present. In
modern reprints, these ancient flowers of typography ought to be
removed. The convenient edition of Hobbes' _Works_, for which we are
indebted to Sir W. Molesworth, would be more agreeable to read if the
italics were less abundant.

The use of the folio and quarto size is now generally restricted to such
books as could scarcely be printed in octavo, as dictionaries and
similar books of reference. The parliamentary blue book, which long
resisted the progress of octave civilization, is now beginning to shrink
into a more manageable size. With regard to separate volumes, the most
convenient practice is to consider them as a mere printer's division,
which may vary in different editions; and to number them consecutively,
without reference to their contents. The Germans have a very
inconvenient practice of dividing a volume into parts, each of which is
a volume in the ordinary meaning of the word; so that a work consisting
of nine volumes, for example, may be divided into four volumes, one of
which consists of three parts, and the other three of two parts each.
The result is, that every reference must specify both the volume and the
part: thus, Band II. Abtheilung III. S. 108. Frequently, too, this mode
of numbering misleads the bookbinder, who (unless properly cautioned)
numbers the volumes in the ordinary manner.

Volumes, as I have remarked, are merely a printer's division. Every
literary composition ought, however, to have an organic division of its
own. The early Greeks seem indeed to have composed both their poems and
prose works as one continuous discourse. The rhapsodies of Homer and the
muses of Herodotus were subsequent divisions introduced by editors and
grammarians. But literary experience pointed out the commodiousness of
such breaks in a long work; and the books of the _Æneid_ and of the
_History of Livy_ were the divisions of the authors themselves. Since
the invention of printing, the books of the prose works of the classical
writers have been subdivided into chapters; while for the books of
poems, as well as for the dramas, the verses have been numbered. The
books of the Old and New Testament have likewise been portioned into
chapters, and into a late typographical division of verses.

In making a division of his work, an author ought to number its parts
consecutively, without reference to volumes. The novels of Walter Scott
are divided into chapters, the numbering of which is dependent on the
volume; so that it is impossible to quote them without referring to the
edition, or to find a reference to them in any other edition than that
cited. For the same reason, an author ought not to quote his own book in
the text by a reference to volumes.

The division most convenient for purposes of reference is that which
renders a quotation simple to note, and easy to verify. Divisions which
run through an entire work (such as the chapters of Gibbon's _History_)
are easy to quote, and the quotation can be easily verified when the
chapter is not long. The numbering of paragraphs in one series through
an entire work, as in the French codes, in Cobbett's writings, and in
the state papers of the Indian government, is the simplest and most
effectual division for purposes of reference. The Digest can now be
referred to by book, title, and paragraph; nevertheless the Germans
(who, notwithstanding their vast experience in the work of quoting, seem
to have a predilection for cumbrous and antiquated methods) still adhere
to the old circuitous mode of quotation, against which Gibbon long ago
raised his voice (_Decl. and Fall_, c. 44. n. 1.).

Some works have been divided by their authors into chapters, but the
chapters have been left unnumbered. Niebuhr's _Roman History_ is in this
state.

The internal division of a work by its author is not, however, merely
for purposes of reference. It may likewise be a _logical_ division; it
may follow the distribution of the subject, and assist the reader by
visibly separating its several parts. This process, however, may be
carried so far as to defeat its purpose (viz. perspicuity of
arrangement) by the intricacy of its divisions. Here again we must
recur for an example to the Germans, who sometimes make the compartments
of their writings as numerous as a series of Chinese boxes all fitted
into each other. First, there is the part, then the book, then the
chapter, then the section, then the article, and then the paragraph,
which is itself subdivided into paragraphs with Roman numerals and
Arabic numerals; and these again are further subdivided into paragraphs
with Roman letters, and Greek letters, and sometimes Hebrew letters. To
refer to a work divided in this manner by any other means than the
volume and page, is a labour of as hopeless intricacy as it is to follow
the logical cascade down its successive platforms.

It is a considerable convenience where the book or chapter is marked at
the head or margin of the page; and in histories, or historical memoirs,
chronological notation is very convenient.

In general no book (not being a book arranged in alphabetical order, as
a dictionary, encyclopedia, &c.) ought to be printed without a _table of
contents_. The trouble to the author of making a table of contents is
very small, and the expense to the publisher in printing it is in
general imperceptible. Modern English books rarely sin in this respect;
foreign books, however, both French and German, are frequently wanting
in a table of contents. The invaluable collection of the fragments of
Greek historians lately published in Didot's Series--a work
indispensable to every critical student of ancient history--has no table
of contents, referring to the pages, prefixed to each volume. The _Poetæ
Scenici Græci_ of Dindorf is without a table of contents; and a similar
want is a serious drawback to the use of the cheap and portable edition
of the Greek and Latin classics published by Tauchnitz at Leipsic.

Lastly, an _index_ adds materially to the value of every work which
contains numerous and miscellaneous facts. The preparation of a good
index is a laborious and sometimes costly task; the printing of it,
moreover, adds to the price of the book. Many of the indexes to the
English law-books are models of this species of labour; the indexes in
the Parliamentary Reports are likewise prepared with great care and
intelligence. Even a meagre index, however, is better than no index at
all; and where the publisher's means, and the demand for the book, do
not admit of the preparation of a copious index of subjects, an
alphabetical list of names of persons and places would often be an
acceptable present to the reader of an historical or scientific work.

    L.


CAXTON MEMORIAL.

The inquiries addressed to me by Mr. BOLTON CORNEY in your paper of the
15th of November appear to amount to this:--Whether the whole or part of
the expense of his proposed volume will be defrayed out of the fund
appropriated to the Caxton Memorial? To this question, so far as my own
information extends, I can only give a negative reply. The Society of
Arts, in compliance with a request preferred to them by the subscribers
at their last meeting, have accepted the charge of the Caxton Fund; and
it is sufficient, for my present purpose, to state that negociations are
now in progress between the Council and the Dean and Chapter, for
liberty to erect a suitable memorial within the precincts of Westminster
to the memory of William Caxton. This is as it should be; the memorial,
be it what it may, statue, obelisk or fountain, or even a niche in a
wall, should be substantial and enduring, calculated to remind the
passing stranger that within the precincts of Westminster, William
Caxton first exercised in England the art of printing. This circumstance
forms one of those epochs in the history of civilisation which deserve
public commemoration; and any memorial of Caxton should be placed as
near as possible to the scene of his literary labours.

Mr. BOLTON CORNEY says, that I seem to regard his project with somewhat
less of disfavour. Now I do not wish to be misunderstood. As a
substitute for the Caxton Memorial, originally proposed at the great
meeting over which the Earl of Carlisle presided, I am disposed to
reject it altogether, for reasons which I have already stated in your
columns. But as a literary undertaking I am willing to give it a fair
consideration upon its own merits. The apothegm that a man's best
monument consists in his own works, is capable of considerable
modification from the nature of the works themselves. In the case before
us, I believe the interest felt by the public in the works of Caxton to
be too limited to justify the republication of his collected works. The
proposal which Mr. CORNEY makes for a selection from those works, with a
new life of the author, and a glossary, the latter proving how much they
are out of date, is much more feasible than his original plan. There is
a Caxton Society which has already issued several publications, and
whose usefulness would be materially increased by such a publication as
that suggested by Mr. CORNEY, if the Society to which he alludes (the
Camden, I presume) should not be disposed to undertake it. The true
object of these and similar societies is the production of books of
interest and value, which are not sufficiently popular to justify a
bookseller, or an individual, in incurring the pecuniary risk of their
separate publication. Mr. CORNEY's literary memorial of Caxton appears
to me to come under this head, and as such might be properly undertaken
by any of the clubs or societies formed for the cultivation of early
English literature. He might perhaps more easily attain the object of
his wishes in this manner than by that which he has hitherto pursued.
When a selection is to be made from the works of any author, much will
depend upon the taste and discretion of the editor. Now I gather from
Mr. CORNEY's letter, that he is fully prepared to undertake that office
himself; and I may be permitted to add that his scrupulous accuracy and
unwearied diligence afford the best guarantee that the work will be
executed in such a manner as to fully satisfy the public interest in
Caxton, and to form a graceful and appropriate tribute to the
illustrious father of the English press.

    BERIAH BOTFIELD.

  Norton Hall, Jan. 3. 1852.


SETTLE'S FEMALE PRELATE, OR POPE JOAN; A TRAGEDY.

I have not seen it anywhere noticed that this play, printed under
Elkanah Settle's name, with a long dedication by him to the Earl of
Shaftsbury, in 1680, 4to., was certainly a mere alteration of an old
play on the same subject. It is impossible for any one to read many
pages of it, without seeing everywhere traces of a much more powerful
hand than "poor Elkanah's," although he needed no assistance in managing
the ceremony of pope-burning. Take at random the following quotation,
which is much more like Middleton's or Decker's than the debased style
after the Restoration:

      "_Saxony._ And art thou then in earnest?
      Come, prithee, speak: I was to blame to chide thee;
      Be not afraid; speak but the fatal truth,
      And by my hopes of heav'n I will forgive thee.
      Out with it, come; now wouldst thou tell me all,
      But art ashamed to own thyself a bawd:
      'Las, that might be thy father's fault, not thine.
      Perhaps some honest humble cottage bred thee,
      And thy ambitious parents, poorly proud,
      For a gay coat made thee a page at court,
      And for a plume of feathers sold thy soul;
      But 'tis not yet, not yet too late to save it.

      _Amir._ Oh, my sad heart!

      _Sax._ Come, prithee, speak; let but
      A true confession plead thy penitence,
      And Heaven will then forgive thee as I do.

      _Amir._ But, Sir, can you resolve to lend an ear
      To sounds so terrible, so full of fate,
      As will not only act a single tragedy,
      But even disjoint all Nature's harmony,
      And quite untune the world? for such, such are
      The notes that I must breathe.

      _Sax._ Oh, my dear murderer,
      Breathe 'em as cheerfully as the soaring lark
      Wakes the gay morn. Those dear sweet airs that kill me
      Are my new nuptial songs. My Angeline
      Has been my first, and Death's my second bride."

      _Fem. Prel._ p. 58.

Or the following:

      "_Sax._ Carlo, she must die;
      The softest heart that yon celestial fire
      Could ever animate, must break and die.
      We are both too wretched to outlive this day;
      And I but send thee as her executioner.

      _Carlo._ I flie to obey you, Sir.

      _Sax._ Stay, Carlo, stay;
      Why all this haste to murder so much innocence?
      Yet, thou must go. And since thy tongue must kill
      The brightest form th' enamoured stars can e'er
      Receive, or the impoverisht world can lose.
      Go, Carlo, go; but prithee wound her soul
      As gently as thou canst; and when thou seest
      A flowing shower from her twin-orbs of light
      All drown the faded roses of her cheeks;
      When thou beholdst, 'midst her distracted groans,
      Her furious hand, that feeble, fair revenger,
      Rend all the mangled beauties of her face.
      Tear her bright locks, and their dishevell'd pride
      On her pale neck, that ravisht whiteness, fall;
      Guard, guard thy eyes: for, Carlo, 'tis a sight
      Will strike spectators dead."--_Fem. Prel._ p. 61.

In the _Biog. Dram._ (vol. iii. p. 237.), it is stated that the same
play, with the same title, was printed in 4to., 1689, except that it was
there said to be written by a person of quality. The play is, however,
claimed by Settle in his dedication to Lord Shaftsbury, prefixed to the
edition of 1680, now before me. I do not, however, believe he had more
to do with it than in adapting it, as he did _Philastes_, for
representation. The only question seems to be by whom the original play
was written? This I will not at present attempt to decide, though I
entertain a strong opinion on the subject, but will leave it to be
resolved by the critical acumen of your readers.

    JAS. CROSSLEY.


HISTORICAL BIBLIOGRAPHY.

(_Eustache le Noble._)

Having been favoured by Mr. Gancia, of 73. King's Road, Brighton, with
an opportunity of examining the following work, I venture to send you a
notice of its contents, with some account of the author. Such books
have, I conceive, their utility to historians and historical readers. We
gain through them an accurate idea of party spirit, are brought into
more immediate communion with the opinions of the times to which they
refer, and can thus trace more closely the means by which parties
worked, were consolidated, and advanced their schemes. Even from their
personalities, we gain some gleams of truth. In this case, I am assured
that perfect copies of the work are _very scarce_. I cannot find that
any other copy has recently been offered for sale. This appeared to me
an additional reason for submitting a notice of it to your readers.

  LE PIERRE DE TOUCHE POLITIQUE, OU PASQUINADES. By Eustache le
  Noble. Rome (Paris), Octobre, 1688; Novembre, 1691. 5 vols. 12mo.

Each of the twenty-eight pieces which compose the work should have an
engraved title, and a separate pagination. The place of publication is
fictitious, and in general satirical. The first volume has a portrait.

The following is a collation from what is understood to form a perfect
copy:

  "Tome 1. Rome, chez Francophile Alétophile. Octobre, 1691.

      Le Cibisme, Le Songe de Pasquin.
      Londres, Jean Benn, 1689.

      Le Couronnement de Guillemot et de la Reine Guillemette,
      avec le Sermon du grand Docteur Burnet.
      Londres, 1689.

      Le Festin de Guillemot, 1689.

      La Chambre des Comptes d'Innocent XI.
      Rome, F. Alétophile, 1689, with portrait.

  "'These five dialogues have for interlocutors Pasquin and
  Marforio, under which names the dialogues are sometimes
  introduced, as also under the title of Pasquinades.' (Quérard,
  art. _Le Noble._)

  "Tome 2. Title (no engraved title). Janvier, 1690.

      Janvier.   La Bibliothèque du Roi Guillemot.
                 Londres, Jean Benn, 1690.

      Février.   La Fable du Renard.
                 Leyde, 1690.

      Mars.      La Diète d'Augsbourg.
                 Vienne, Peter Hansgood, 1690.

      Avril.     La Lotterie de Pasquin.
                 Basle, Eugene Tyrannomostix, 1690.

      Mai.       L'Ombre de Monmouth.
                 Oxford, _James Good King_, 1690.

      Juin.      Les Medaillez.
                 Amsterdam, Eugene Philolethe, 1690.

  "Tome 3.  Title.

      Juillet.   La Clef du Cabinet de Neufbourg.
                 Heidelberg, Neopolo Palatino, 1690.

      Août.      Le Triomphe.
                 Fleuruz, chez Valdekin Bienbattu, 1690.

      Septembre. Les Ombres de Schomberg et de Lorraine.
                 Dublin, chez Le Vieux, Belle Montaigne.

      Octobre.   La Lanterne de Diogène.
                 Whitehall, chez La Veuve Guillemot. 1690.

      Novembre.  Les Mercures, ou la Tabatière des Etats d'Hollande.
                 Hermstadt, chez Emeric Hospodar, 1690.

      Décembre.  Le Roy des Fleurs.
                 A Bride, chez Leopol la Dupe.

  "Tome 4. Title.

      Janvier.   Les Estrennes d'Esope ('burnt at Amsterdam, by the
                 hand of the hangman, by order of the States-General.
                 The dialogue had its origin, probably, in the
                 proscription of the History of the Republic of Holland
                 by the same author, which was seized wherever it was
                 found.'--_Peignot._).
                 Bruxelles, chez Jean Gobbin, 1691.

      Février.   L'Ombre du Duc d'Albe, with illustration.
                 Anvers, Antoine Maugouverne, 1691.

      Mars.      Le Carnaval de la Haye, with illustration.
                 A la Haye, chez Guillaume l'Emballeur, 1691.

      Avril.     Le Tabouret des Electeurs, with illustration.
                 Honslar dük, Guillemin Tabouret, 1691.

      Mai.       Le Reveille Matin des Alliez, with illustration.
                 A Monts, Guillaume le Chasseur, 1691.

      Juin.      Les Lunettes pour le Quinze Vingts.
                 Turin, Jean sans Terre, 1691.

  "Tome 5. Title.

      Juillet.   Nostradamus, ou les Oracles, with illustration.
                 A Liege, Lambert Bonnefoi, 1691.

                 La Fable du Baudet Extraordinaire, with illustration.
                 A Asnières, chez Jean le Singe, 1691.

      Août.      L'Anneau des Giges, with illustration.
                 A Venise, Penetrante Penetranti, 1691.

      Septembre. L'Avortement, with illustration.
                 Gerpines, chez Guillaume Desloge sur le Quai des
                 Morfondus au Pistolet qui prend un Rat, 1691.

      Octobre.   Le Jean de Retour, with illustration.
                 A Loo, chez Guillaume Pie de Nez, rue Perdue au Bien
                 Revenu, 1691.

      Novembre.  Le Prothée, with illustration.
                 Chez Pedre l'Endormy, 1691."

Eustache le Noble, Baron of St. George and of Tenelière, the author of
this work, was born at Troyes in 1643, of a good and ancient family. His
natural abilities and attainments, combined with political influence,
readily obtained for him, at an early age, the post of Procureur-Général
to the Parliament at Metz. But a dissolute life soon brought on its
consequent evils--duties neglected and discreditable debts--and he was
compelled to sell his appointment. The proceeds were insufficient, and
he had recourse to forgery to satisfy his creditors. To be successful in
such a case, more than ability is required. Le Noble was suspected,
arrested, confined in the Châtelet, and condemned to nine years'
imprisonment. Upon his appeal, he was removed to the Conciergerie, a
place destined to become another scene in his life of uniform villainy.
Gabrielle Perreau, known under the name of "La Belle Epicière," was
confined here at the instigation of her husband, who indulged in the
hope of thus reforming her disorderly conduct. But a prison is hardly a
school of reformation, and La Belle Epicière and Le Noble were not
characters to receive, even in monastic seclusion, any such impression.
He won her affections, or the mastery over her passions: the husband,
frantic with jealous rage, obtained for himself the satisfaction of
immuring her in a convent of his own selection. From this she escaped,
and joined Le Noble, who had similarly evaded the vigilance of his
keepers. By living in the vilest and least frequented quarters of Paris,
by disguises, false names, and constant changes of residence, they
succeeded in baffling the pursuit of the police for three years, when Le
Noble was accidentally discovered; the judgment of the Châtelet was
confirmed, and he was reconducted to prison. It was then that his great
resources were displayed. He retained his gaiety, and assured his
friends he still enjoyed "une parfaite tranquillité d'esprit,
inséparable de l'innocence!" A man of this kind, with a venal and
capacious intellect, and a heart utterly unconscious of the slightest
moral feeling, could not with advantage be suffered to remain
unemployed. There was work to be done for James II., and the hireling
was worthy of his hire. It was simply to lie and libel with ability,
with caution, with the appearance of loyalty, and an ardent zeal for
religion. Le Noble was equal to the task. He had written histories burnt
by the hangman; Bayle had praised him for his skill in judicial
astrology; he had composed treatises on money, and on Catholic doctrine;
compiled historical romances, and translated the Psalms of David! In
poetry he had attempted to rival La Fontaine; written the Eulogy of the
Revocation of the Edict of Nantes, and translated Persius,--substituting
French customs for the Roman, and praising, or censuring, his
contemporaries as though he were the Roman poet and not the Paris
scribe! An ability so various was at least well paid. He received from
the booksellers, and others by whom he was retained, a hundred pistoles
a month; Peignot states, in all, about one hundred thousand crowns.
There cannot be the least doubt this was but a portion of his earnings,
or that the work I have described was not written for the Jacobite
interest of James II. But no success in such characters is ever
accompanied with prudence. Although the penalty of banishment from
France was suspended, that his venal abilities might assist the designs
of others, he was always living between luxury and the direst want. As
he advanced in years, he was less useful, and was consequently driven
from doors where he had formerly been welcomed. D'Argenson allowed him a
louis-d'or for charity per week; but all other resources failed, until,
in his sixty-eighth year, after a long period of misery, and of the
uttermost mental and bodily degradation, he died on the 31st January,
1711, and was buried at the communal expense. It cannot be denied that
Le Noble united many pleasing qualities as a writer. He had read much,
could condense ably, and united to a strong memory a rare facility in
employing its resources. He touched with light ridicule the weaker
points of a case, and could wield both reason, sarcasm and polished
inuenda in misstating facts, or damaging the argument of his
adversaries. Such a man was well adapted to the French advisers of
James. Public attention was to be engaged and won by falsehoods in the
disguise of truth; bad designs were to be cloaked under moral purposes;
and the revolution was to be discredited in the name of loyalty and
religion. All this Le Noble did with infinite ability, and infinite
obliquity. I can give but a slight sketch of his work. The _Couronnement
de Guillemot_ is a violent tirade against William. Marforio and Pasquin
converse about his coronation, and the king is described as one "qui
vouloit estre le bourreau du Prince de Galles." Churchill is "l'infame
comblé de tant de bienfaitz par son bon maître, et qui l'a vendu, trahi
et livré." In the decorations of the abbey, consisting of tapestry, &c.,
there is stated to be a representation of Pilate placing Jesus Christ
and Barabbas before the people, and the choice of Barabbas by the
latter; James occupying, in Le Noble's opinion, the place of the former.
The people he describes as preferring even "ce voleur public, ce
scélérat, ce séditieux de Barabbas, ce meurtrier qui a poignardé les
_Withs_ (Witts), à cet aimable maistre qui n'a jamais eu pour eux que de
la douceur et de la bonté." The _Sermon du grand Docteur Burnet_ is very
clever, light, pungent, and satirical, especially against the king: the
text being "Dominus regnavit, exultet terræ, lætentur insulæ." In the
_L'Ombre de Monmouth_, William is described as wishing to be "le singe
du glorieux Cromwell;" Portland, Shrewsbury, Burnet, and Dykvelt, are
"ses quatre Evangélistes;" and the king is made to utter violent
complaints against the Parliament, which he calls "une étrange beste,"
and adds: "Si je n'avois pas cassé celui que j'ai rompu pour en
convoquer un autre, toutes mes affaires s'en alloient sens dessus
dessous." In the _Estrennes d'Esope_, which was burnt by order of the
States-General, there is the following description of England:

  "L'Angleterre sous son Roi légitime et ne lui donnant qu'avec
  epargne comme elle faisoit le nécessaire pour son entretien,
  estoit justement comme ces sages et vertueuses femmes qui, fidèles
  à leurs époux, gouvernen avec un prudent économie leur ménage
  reglé, et cette mesme Angleterre, qui s'épuise pour satisfaire à
  l'avidité d'un tyran, est aujourd'hui comme une de ces infames
  debauchées qui, emportée de fureur pour une adultère qui l'enlève
  à son mari, lui fait une profusion criminelle de son bien."

In illustrations such as these, Le Noble was most happy, as with the
vice he was most familiar. The length of this paper precludes my sending
to you a pasquinade, in the epitaph written for Innocent XI., which,
considering its purport, is of value as indicating the opinions of the
Jacobites against the policy of the Pope. This I will do in another
paper.

    S. H.


CALAMITIES OF AUTHORS.

The miseries and disappointments of the literary life are proverbial:

  "Toil, envy, want, the patron and the gaol."

To these "calamities of authors," I wish to add a new, and as yet
unrecorded trial, incidental to this age of cheap postage and
extravagant puffs. I am myself _a small author_, and have written on
theology and antiquarianism; and my publisher's shelves know the weight
of my labours. Conceive then my delight, a few weeks ago, at receiving a
"confidential" letter from B. D., requesting the immediate transmission
of my theological tomes to a country address; on the representation
that, although B. D. well knew that my writings had been favourably
received, he judged that "striking recommendations at this moment in
influential journals to which he had reviewing access during the
parliamentary recess, would prove of essential service." I wrote to my
publisher, who coolly answered that it was "no go;" and I even stood the
tempting shock of a second application from B. D., remonstratively
hinting that, but for the non-arrival of the volumes, a notice would
have appeared that very week in an "important quarter." The hopeful mind
has difficulty in settling down into a belief that men deceive.

Not a month had elapsed before I received another letter, sealed with
such a signet as in size would rival the jewel sometimes seen pendent
from the waistcoat pocket of a Jew broker on Saturday, and engraven with
evidence of illustrious lineage, if quarterings be only half true. I did
not break this magnificent seal, but I tore open the envelope, and I
found that my antiquarian researches had been most flatteringly
estimated by a gentleman with a double surname, which happened to be
familiar to me. The communication was, of course, "private;" and it
expressed the writer's knowledge, from hearsay, of the "value, merit,
and ability" of my book, and the satisfaction it would afford my
correspondent, to give it a "handsome an elaborate review in both the
widely circulating and reviewing publications with which he had the
honour of being connected." A copy of my work was to be sent to his own
address, or to that of his bookseller: or, even a third course was
obligingly opened to me--"he would send his man-servant to my publisher
for the volume!" I sent the book, and the same day communicated with the
head of the family who legally bore this very handsome name used by my
correspondent, and he told me that he had just received 5_l._ worth of
books from a great house in "the Row," which were obviously designed to
be the response to an application from the gentleman with a large seal,
who was "an impostor." This may be so; but I have received an
acknowledgement for the receipt of my little work, so kind and courtly
in its tone, that I do not even yet quite despair of one day reading the
promised "handsome and elaborate review."

    A SMALL AUTHOR.


FOLK LORE.

_Valentine's Day--Superstition in Devonshire._--The peasants and others
believe that if they go to the porch of a church, waiting there till
half-past twelve o'clock on the eve of St. Valentine's day, with some
hempseed in his or her hand, and at the time above-named then proceed
homewards, scattering the seed on either side, repeating these lines--

      "Hempseed I sow, hempseed I mow,
      She (or he) that will my true love be,
      Come rake this hempseed after me;"--

his or her true love will be seen behind, raking up the seed just sown,
in a winding-sheet. Do any of your readers know the origin of this
superstitious custom?

    J. S. A.

  Old Broad Street.

_Fairies._--An Irish servant of mine, a native of Galway, gave me the
following relations:--Her father was a blacksmith and for his many acts
of benevolence to benighted travellers became a great favourite with the
fairies, who paid him many visits. It was customary for the fairies to
visit his forge at night, after the family had retired to rest, and here
go to work in such right good earnest, as to complete, on all occasions,
the work which had been left overnight unfinished. The family were on
these occasions awoke from their slumber by the vigorous puffing of
bellows, and hammering on anvil, consequent upon these illustrious
habits of the fairies, and it was an invariable rule for the fairies to
replace all the tools they had used during the night; and, moreover, if
the smithy had been left in confusion the previous evening, the "good
people" always arranged it, swept the floor, and restored everything to
order before the morning. I never could glean from her any detailed
instances of the labour accomplished in this way, or indeed anything
which might aid in the formation of an estimate of the relative skill of
the fairies in manual labour; and I must confess that on these subjects
I never question too closely,--the reader will know why.

On one occasion, one of the family happening to be unwell, the father
went back to the smithy at midnight for some medicine which had been
left there on the shelf, and put the "good people" to flight, just as
they had begun their industrial orgies. To disturb the fairies is at any
time a perilous thing; and so it proved to him: for a fat pig died the
following day, little Tike had the measles, too, after, and no end of
misfortunes followed. In addition to this occult revenge, the inmates of
the house were kept awake for several nights by a noise similar to that
which would be produced by peas being pelted at the windows. The
statement was made with an earnestness of manner which betrayed a faith
without scruples.

    SHIRLEY HIBBERD.


Minor Notes.

_Lines in Whispering Gallery at Gloucester Cathedral._--The following
verse is inscribed in the Whispering Gallery of Gloucester Cathedral; to
preserve it, and as a "Note" to the fourth stanza of the "Ditty" I
inserted in Vol iv., p. 311., I copied it for "N. & Q."

      "Doubt not but God who sits on high,
        Thy secret prayers can hear;
      When a dead wall thus cunningly
        Conveys soft whispers to the ear."

    H. G. D.

_Definition of Thunder._--The following singular definition of _thunder_
occurs in Bailey's _Dictionary_, vol. i. 17th edit., 1759:--

  "Thunder [Dunder, Sax. &c.], a noise known by persons not deaf."

In Bailey's 2nd vol. 2nd edition, 1731 (twenty-eight years previous to
the edition of vol. i. above cited), the word is much more
scientifically treated.

    CRANMORE.

_Greek Epigram by an uncertain Author._--

      Εἴ με φιλοῦντα φιλεῖς, δισσὴ χάρις· εἰ δέ με μισεῖς,
      Τόσσον μισηθείης, ὅσσον ἐγώ σε φιλῶ.

      _Imitated._

      "Shouldst thou, O Daphne! for my sake,
        An equal pain endure,
      A sense of gratitude will make
        The bond of love secure.

      But shouldst thou, reckless of my fate,
        Unkind and cruel prove,
      Sweet maid, thou'lt never learn to hate
        So truly as I love."

    N. N.




Queries.


BURNING OF THE JESUITICAL BOOKS AT PARIS.

The Quarterly Reviewer who endeavours in the number just published to
establish the claim of Thomas Lord Lyttelton to the authorship of
Junius, instances the following coincidence in support of his theory:--

  "Junius tells us directly, 'I remember seeing Busenbaum, Suarez,
  Molina, and a score of other Jesuitical books, burnt at Paris, for
  their sound casuistry by the hands of the common hangman.' _We may
  assume_ that this took place in 1764, as it was in that year that
  Choiseul suppressed the Jesuits. Thomas Lyttelton was on the
  continent during the whole of 1764, and for part of that time
  resided at Paris."[1]

  [Footnote 1: [The burning of the books referred to by BIFRONS not
  Junius (unless it be proved that JUNIUS and BIFRONS are one, which
  is not yet universally admitted), took place on 7th August, 1761.
  See a very curious note on the subject in Bohn's recently
  published edition of _Junius_, vol. ii. pp. 175-6.--ED. "N. &
  Q."]]

But the orders of the parliament of Paris against the Jesuits, one of
which condemned some thirty of their books to be burnt, were issued
three years before the suppression of their order in France, viz., in
the early part and summer of 1761. That Thomas Lyttelton could then have
been in Paris is highly improbable; he was only seventeen, and it was a
time of war. Will any one take the trouble to ascertain where Francis
was? I believe he was appointed secretary to the Portuguese embassy in
1760, and returned to London in 1763.

    H. MERIVALE.


GRANTHAM ALTAR CASE.

An old book now lies before me, intituled _England's Reformation from
the time of King Henry VIII. to the end of Oates's Plot, a Poem in four
Cantos, with large Marginal Notes according to the Original. By Thomas
Ward. London: Printed for W. B. and sold by Thomas Bickerton, in Little
Britain._ 1716.

In Canto IV., and beginning at p. 353., there is an account of a brawl
in the parish church of Grantham, anno 1627, arising, as appears by a
marginal note, out of circumstances connected with the "removal of the
Communion table from the upper part of the quire to the altar place." A
master alderman Wheatley, assisted by "an innkeeper fat as brawn," and
"a bow-legged tailor that was there," appears to have taken an active
part in the scuffle which ensued upon the vicar's persisting in his
determination. The alderman and his mob seem to have been triumphant on
this occasion, for we read, p. 356.:

      "The alderman, by help of rabble,
      Brought from the wall communion table;
      Below the steps he plac'd it, where
      It stood before, in midst of quire."

A pamphlet war followed; for there was immediately _A Letter to the
Vicar of Grantham about setting his Table altarwise_. In answer to this
came _A Coal from the Altar_; which was in its turn assailed by _The
Quench Coal out_, and _The Holy Table, Name and Thing_ (said to have
been written by Williams, Bishop of Lincoln.) A Dr. Pocklington (who was
he?) espoused the side of the Altar party, and published his _Altare
Christianum_. During this literary contest the vicar appears to have
died, and, some twelve months after his death, out comes _The Dead
Vicar's Plea_.

The affair seems to have created what we should now call a great
sensation in the "religious world:" for, says our author:

      "Scarce was a pen but what has try'd,
      And books flew out on every side,
      Till ev'ry fop set up for wit,
      And Laud, and Hall and Heylin writ,
      And so did White and Montague,
      And Shelford, Cousins, Watts, and Dow,
      Lawrence and Forbis, and a crew
      Whose names would"----

Master Ward did not like these men, and therefore I omit his rather
uncharitable conclusion.

Is there any record left of the notable quarrel, which appears to have
engaged the attention and pens of some of the learned men of the age?
Perhaps some of your correspondents at Grantham could throw some light
upon this question.

    L. L. L.

  Kirton-in-Lindsey.

  [This celebrated altar controversy occurred during the reign of
  Charles I., and its origin will be found in Clarendon's _History
  of the Rebellion_. The Puritans contended that the proper place
  for the table, when the eucharist was administered, was in the
  body of the church before the chancel door, and to be placed
  _tablewise_, and not _altarwise;_ that is, that one of the _ends_
  of the table was to be placed towards the east, so that one of the
  larger sides might be to the north, the priest being directed to
  stand at the north side, and not at the north _end_ of the table.
  The Church party, on the contrary, contended that as the
  Injunctions ordered that the table should stand where the altar
  used to stand, it should consequently be placed as the altar was.
  This matter was the source of much violent contention, and tracts
  were published neither remarkable for courtesy of language nor for
  accurate statements of facts. It appears to have originated in a
  dispute between Mr. Titly, the Vicar of Grantham, and his
  parishioners, respecting the proper place for the table. The vicar
  insisted that it ought to stand at the upper end of the chancel,
  against the east wall. Some of the parishioners contended that it
  should stand in the body of the church. The vicar removed it from
  that situation, and placed it in the chancel. The alderman of the
  borough and others replaced it in its former situation, when a
  formal complaint was made to the bishop (Williams). In 1627 the
  bishop published his judgment on the question, in _A Letter to the
  Vicar of Grantham_. The visitation of 1634 tempted Peter Heylyn to
  republish this _Letter_, together with an answer under the title
  of _A Coal from the Altar_, &c. Williams replied in 1637 by a
  treatise entitled _The Holy Table, Name and Thing, more anciently
  and literally used under the New Testament than that of Altar_.
  Heylyn rejoined by his _Antidotum Lincolniense; or an Answer to a
  Book entitled "The Holy Altar, Name and Thing," &c._ The bishop
  was preparing for his further vindication, when he was prevented
  by his troubles in the Star Chamber, in consequence of which his
  library was seized. "And how," says Hacket, "could he fight
  without his arms? or, how could the bell ring when they had stolen
  away the clapper?" During the controversy Dr. Pocklington,
  Chaplain in Ordinary to the King, published his _Altare
  Christianum; or, the Dead Vicar's Plea, wherein the Vicar of
  Grantham being dead yet speaketh, and pleadeth out of Antiquity
  against him that hath broken down his Altar_, 4to. 1637. The best
  historical notice of this controversy is given in Hacket's _Life
  of Archbishop Williams_, pt. ii. pp. 99-109., and was particularly
  referred to by the counsel on the Cambridge stone altar case,
  1844-1845, as well as by Sir Herbert Jenner Fust in his judgment
  on it.]


MEANING OF GROOM.

In investigating the descent of two Devonshire families, I save met with
four instances of persons designating themselves as _groom_. They were
certainly well connected, and in fortune apparently much above the class
of people who accept the care of horses in this present day.

If they were grooms of horses, society was in a very different state
from that in which it is at the present day; if they were not such
grooms, what then were they? I believe they were unmarried persons.
First, there is Samuel Weeks, of South Tawton, groom; will proved in the
Archdeacon of Exeter's Court, 1639. His father was Richard Weeks, styled
gentleman in the parish register; and Samuel Weeks signs his name in a
peculiarly fine Italian hand, that I do not remember to have seen in any
instance of that time except in that of a thorough gentleman.

Francis Kingwell, of Crediton, groom. His will was proved in the
Bishop's Court in 1639; his sister married a Richard Hole, of South
Tawton, yeoman of substance; her second husband was John Weeks, of South
Tawton, gentleman, and his sons were gentlemen. These Weekses were, I
doubt not, nearly related to the Wykes or Weeks, of North Wyke, in the
same parish, a family of great antiquity.

Thirdly, here is John Hole, of South Tawton, groom, 1640. His inventory
is 180_l._, of which 4_l._ was for his clothes, whereas a gentleman in
one case in this neighbourhood has his clothes valued at ten shillings;
Kingwell's inventory was the same.

Robert Hole, of Zeal Monachorum, groom, is the fourth instance. His will
was proved at Westminster in 1654; he was the son of a wealthy yeoman,
and his brother, Thomas Hole, was a gentleman.

I trouble you that I may learn, through your kindness, whether _groom_,
in these instances, was used with the meaning which we attach to it; or
at that time, or in the English language, or the vernacular tongue of
central Devonshire, meant anything else.

    E. DAVIS PROTHEROE.


Minor Queries.

_Gregentius and the Jews in Arabia Felix._--

  "We have a remarkable instance to this purpose in ecclesiastical
  history, which is attested by many and great authors. It seems,
  about 400 years after our Saviour's ascension, one Gregentius, a
  bishop, endeavoured the conversion of those Jews which lived in
  Arabia Felix. After a tedious disputation of three days'
  continuance some of the Jews desired the bishop to show them Jesus
  alive, and it would convince them. Immediately upon this the earth
  began to tremble, and the sky to shine and echo with lightnings
  and thunder. After these ceased, the gates of the celestial palace
  opened, and a bright serene cloud appeared, darting forth beams of
  an extraordinary lustre. At last our blessed Saviour showed
  himself walking on this bright cloud, and a voice was heard from
  this excellent glory saying, 'I am He who was crucified by your
  fathers.' This glorious appearance cast all the Jews prostrate on
  the ground, and, beating their breasts, they cried with a loud
  voice, 'Lord have mercy on us!' and afterwards were baptised into
  the faith of Christ."--_Sermons_ by John March, B.D., late Vicar
  of Newcastle-upon-Tyne. 2nd ed. 1699, p. 235.

Who are the "many and great authors" who have attested this
extraordinary apparition?

    E. H. A.

_King Street Theatre._--Among a large collection of medallic tickets of
admission to theatres, I am unable to fix the precise attribution of the
following:

Ob.: A group of dramatic emblems, mask, sword, mirror, scourge, and a
legend:

  "Spectas et tu spectabere. King Street Theatre."

Rev.:

  "Admit Mr. Cooper, or bearer, to any part of the house before the
  curtain."

The ticket is of silver, and is evidently of the time of Garrick; it
cannot therefore apply to the theatre in King Street, St. James's, which
is of recent erection; nor am I aware of any other King Street in London
which contained a theatre. Its situation will most probably be found in
some provincial town.

If any of your obliging correspondents could furnish information as to
its locality, they would confer a favour on the writer.

    B. N.

_Lesteras and Emencin._--In an old MS. I meet with the following
words:--

  "One (a pillar) was made of _Lefteras_ (I do not know whether the
  third letter is an _s_ or an _f_ in the original) which would not
  burn."

  "After they came to the land of _Emencin_, which is the country of
  Jerusalem."

Can any of your readers give me any information as to either of the
words _Lesteras_ or _Emencin_?

    O. OGLE.

  Oxford.

_Epigram on Franklin and Wedderburn._--Will any of your correspondents
acquaint me with the name of the author of the following lines, written
shortly after Dr. Franklin's attendance at the Privy Council in January,
1774, in allusion to Wedderburn's severe remarks upon him?--

      "Sarcastic Sawney, full of spite and hate,
      On modest Franklin poured his venal prate;
      The calm philosopher without reply
      Withdrew--and gave his country liberty."

The lines were repeated to me by the late Francis Maseres, Esq.,
Cursitor Baron of the Court of Exchequer.

    W. S.

  Richmond, Surrey.

_Plenius and his Lyrichord._--May I hope to ascertain, through the
medium of your journal, where to look for information on the subject of
the "lyrichord of Plenius," referred to in Rees' _Encyclopædia_, art.
"Basse Fondamentale," as having been "tuned by weights instead of
tension?" The point left in doubt by this, is whether a single weight
was substituted for tension, or whether the different notes in the
musical scale were produced by altering the weight according to the
rules for that purpose.

Was Plenius an ancient, a Middle-Age man, or was he _Herr Plen_, who
latinized his name, as was the fashion a century or two ago?

    T.

_Epigram on Burnet._--A friend of mine across the Atlantic wishes to
ask, whether any one knows where the following epigram, which he
remembers in MS. in an old folio copy of Burnet's _History_, comes
from:--

      "If Heaven is pleas'd when sinners cease to sin,
      If Hell is pleas'd when sinners enter in,
      If men are pleas'd at parting with a knave,
      Then all are pleas'd--for Burnet's in his grave."

    C. B.

_Dutch Chronicle of the World._--Will any of your readers oblige me with
information respecting a Dutch work, professing to be an historical
chronicle of the world from the creation to the time in which it was
printed, which was in the days of _Merian_, the celebrated engraver,
father to the naturalist Madame Merian, who was also an artist of some
repute. The work I allude to was illustrated by numerous spirited
engravings (supposed to have been executed on _pewter_), and of which I
possess several hundred, which had been cut out of the letter-press
which surrounded the prints, and bought at a stall in London many years
back. I question whether there is a copy of the work to be found in
England, except it be in the British Museum.

    JOHN FENTON.

"_Arborei foetus alibi, atque injussa virescunt Gramina_" (_Virgil G._
I. 55.).--Amongst my school reminiscences, I retain very distinctly the
remembrance of the surprise we felt in the sixth form, when we were
desired by our revered and excellent master to construe the above words
as follows:

  "'Arborei foetus,' _flourish unbidden in one situation, grass in
  another_."

Or, more literally:

  "'Arborei foetus,' _flourish unbidden in situations different from
  those in which grass (flourishes unbidden)_."

I well remember too, that some of us, while we admired the ingenuity,
ventured to doubt the correctness of the translation. Will some of your
learned correspondents kindly favour me with their opinions?

    W. S.

_History of Brittany._--I shall feel obliged to any one who can refer me
to a good history or histories of Brittany; more especially to those
which relate to the genealogies and heraldry of the Breton families, or
which contain pedigrees.

    T. H. KERSLEY, B.A.

_Serjeants' Rings._--T. P. would be obliged to any of your antiquarian
readers who could inform him, through the medium of your paper, whether
the custom of serjeants-at-law presenting rings with mottoes, on taking
the coif, prevailed so long back as A.D. 1670-80, and, if so, whether
there are any records, or other sources, from which he could ascertain
the motto used by an individual who was admitted to that degree about
that period?

_The Duchess of Cleveland's Cow-pox._--In Baron's _Life of Jenner_, Vol.
i. p. 123., there occurs the following note, extracted from one of Dr.
Jenner's note-books of 1799:

  "I know of no direct allusion to the disease in any ancient
  author, yet the following seems not very distantly to bear upon
  it. When the Duchess of Cleveland was taunted by her companions,
  Moll Davis (Lady Mary Davis) and others, that she might soon have
  to deplore the loss of that beauty which was then her boast, the
  small-pox at that time raging in London, she made a reply to this
  effect,--that she had no fear about the matter, for she had had a
  disorder which would prevent her from ever catching the small-pox.
  This was lately communicated by a gentleman in this county, but
  unfortunately he could not recollect from what author he gained
  his intelligence."

Can any reader of "N. & Q." supply this missing authority for a fact
which is very important in the history of medicine--if true?

    ONETWOTHREE.

_Arms of Manchester._--What are the arms of Manchester? and are they of
ancient usage? or only assigned to the town since its incorporation? and
if the latter, whence did the bearings originate?

    H. H. H. V.

_Heraldical MSS. of Sir Henry St. George Garter._--What has become of
these valuable MSS.? and if the place of their deposit is known, can
access be obtained to them for literary purposes? They were, as Noble
relates, originally sold into the Egmont family, and descended to John
James, the third Earl; but some time after his death, about the year
1831, all the personal property of the family was disposed of; the
effects at Enmore Castle were sold by auction on the spot; and the
writer of this well remembers seeing the old family pictures preparing
for the same fate in a sales-room in Conduit Street, he thinks of Mr.
Abbots. Mr. Braithwaite, of Great Russell Street, was the auctioneer
employed at Enmore, and an inquiry was made of him at the time relative
to these MSS., and the answer was, that they also were destined to the
hammer. A catalogue also was promised whenever it should come out. The
writer was subsequently informed that the MSS. were withdrawn, and he
could never learn what became of them.

    M----N.


Minor Queries Answered.

_The Pelican, as a Symbol of the Saviour._--Is the pelican now, or was
it formerly considered as a symbol of Our Saviour? I have seen it used
in the ancient decorations of churches, but never looked on it as such;
nor can I remember ever having seen it mentioned as an emblem of the
Saviour, with the exception of one passage in Dante's Vision (Canto
xxv.) of Paradise.

    ROBERT NELSON.

  [In the _Calendar of the Anglican Church Illustrated_, p. 328.,
  will be found an engraving of "a pelican feeding her young with
  blood from her own breast, signifying the Saviour giving Himself
  up for the redemption of mankind;" and in the foot-note references
  to Aringhi's _Roma Subterranea_, and other works, in which other
  representations of the same symbol are to be found. Our
  correspondent may also be referred to Alt's _Heiligenbilder_, s.
  56.]

_Bishop Coverdale's Bible._--When did Bishop Coverdale _commence_ his
translation of the Bible? Where was the first edition printed? Is any
copy in existence which possesses the _original_ title-page, i.e. _not_
the one added in England, stating that it is translated from the "Douche
and Latyn?"

    H. H. H. V.

  [We have submitted H. H. H. V.'s Query to our obliging
  correspondent, GEORGE OFFOR, ESQ., whose library is particularly
  rich in early English versions of the Bible, and who has kindly
  favoured us with the following communication]:--

In reply to your correspondent H. H. H. V.'s very curious question to
know when Myles Coverdale _commenced_ his translation, I beg to state
that he was born in 1488, and that it has not yet been discovered when
his mind was first led to contemplate the translation of the Sacred
Scriptures, nor whether he _commenced_ with the New or the Old
Testament. The facts known are, that he finished the translation or the
printing of it on the 4th day of October, 1535,--probably at Cologne,
because other books printed there about that time have the same
initials, wood-cuts, and type. A copy, with the original title-page, is
in the Holkham library, having, on the reverse, part of the list of
books, showing that originally it was without a dedication; this has the
words, "Douche and Latyn." When the dedication was printed, this title
was cancelled and a new one printed, still with the words "Douche and
Latyn," with the reverse blank. A fine copy of this is in the possession
of Earl Jersey, and one with the title-page repaired is in the British
Museum. Perfect copies have a map of Palestine. In 1537, this book was
reprinted, both in folio and quarto, probably at Antwerp, and in these
the words "from the Douche and Latyn" were very properly omitted,
Coverdale being still living to see them through the press; these are
ornamented with large initial letters with a dance of death, and are the
rarest volumes in the English language. In these the dedication is
altered from Queen Anne to Queen Jane, as the wife of Henry VIII. They
were all dedicated to the king and to the queen; the two latter are all
in Old English type. These were followed by an edition dedicated to
Edward VI. in a Swiss type, 4to., printed at Zurich by Chr. Froschover,
and published under three titles--1st, as the translation of Thos.
Matthewe; 2nd, as the translation of Myles Coverdale, London, by Andrew
Hester, 1550; and 3rd, London, by Jugge, 1553. These are books of great
rarity, and may be all seen in my library by any of your readers,
sanctioned by a note from you or any minister of religion. My first
edition has several uncut leaves.

The introduction of the words "from the Douche (meaning Luther's German)
and Latyn" has never been accounted for; they probably were inserted by
the German printer to make the volume more popular, so as to interest
reformers by the German of Luther, and Romanists by the Vulgate Latin.
The translation is certainly from the Hebrew and Greek, compared with
Luther's and the Vulgate.

    GEORGE OFFOR.

  Grove Street, Victoria Park.

_Age of the Oak._--The late Queries respecting the age of trees, remind
me of some lines of which I have been long in search--

      "The monarch oak, the patriarch of the trees,
      Shoots rising up, and spreads by slow degrees:
      Three centuries he grows, and three he stays
      Supreme in state; and in three more decays."

I think it probable that they are from a play of Dryden or Otway; but
some of your readers may probably be able to answer this Query.

    T. C.

  Durham.

  [In Richardson's _Dictionary_, as well as in the _Encyclopædia
  Metropolitana_, these lines are quoted under the word _Patriarch_,
  as from _The Cock and the Fox_, by Dryden; whereas Bysshe, in his
  _Art of English Poetry_, under the word _Oak_, refers us to
  Dryden's _Ovid_. In neither of these pieces do they occur; our
  correspondent, however, will find them in Dryden's _Palamon and
  Arcite, or the Knight's Tale_, line 2334.]

_Olivarius._--Can any of your readers inform me what is the title of a
book written by Olivarius, a French astrologer, 1542, in which there is
a prophecy relative to France, and somewhat similar to that of St.
Cæsarius (p. 471.)? What was his christian name, and in what library is
the work to be found?

    CLERICUS D.

  Dublin.

  [Maittaire, in his _Annales Typograph._, tom. v. pt. ii. p. 102.,
  notices the following work: "Olivarius (Petrus Joannes) Valentinus
  de Prophetiâ. Basileæ ex officinâ Joannis Oporini, 1543, mense
  Augusto." From the catalogues of the British Museum and the
  Bodleian, it does not appear to be in either of these libraries.]

_Vincent Bourne's Epilogus in Eunuchum Terentii._--Will any of your
readers inform me whether an Epilogue to the _Eunuch_ of Terence,
written by V. Bourne, and spoken in 1746, has ever been printed in any,
and what, edition of Bourne's _Poems_? Gnatho appears on the stage,
dressed as a recruiting sergeant, with several recruits, and thus
begins:

      "Siste--tace--Gnatho sum Miles, cum gloria cives
        Evocat ad Martem, quis parasitus erit?
      Aut quis venari coenas et prandia malit,
        Nobile cui stimulet pectus honoris amor?"

And the concluding lines are:

      "Arma viros facient--Vosmet simul arma geratis,
        Seribatis, jubeo, protinus armigeros:
      Hâc lege, ut conclametis, Rex Vivat; idemque
        Tu repetas, Stentor noster, utrâque manu."

This epilogue is in my possession in MS., the handwriting of my father,
who was, in 1746, a scholar of Westminster College. It should seem, from
a letter written to the _Gentleman's Magazine_ by the late Archdeacon
Nares, in April, 1826, and reprinted in Nichols's _Illustrations_, vol.
vii. p. 656., that he was in possession of a copy, as he there tenders
it to the editor of the sixth edition of _Bourne_, which had then (1826)
recently issued from the Oxford press.

    W. S.

  Richmond, Surrey.

  [The Epilogue referred to will be found in the beautiful edition
  of Vinny Bourne's _Poems_, published by Pickering in 1840, and in
  the _Gentleman's Magazine_, May, 1826, p. 450, where, however, the
  first line reads--

  'Siste, tace; Gnatho sum Miles, cum gloria _pulchra_,' &c.]

_Burton, Bp., Founder of Schools, &c., at Loughborough, co.
Leicester._--Can any of your genealogical readers give a clue to his
family, and their armorial bearings?

    J. K.

  [Thomas Burton was a French merchant, not a prelate. A short
  notice of him and his gifts will be found in the _Reports of
  Commissioners of Inquiry into Charities_, and in Carlisle's
  _Endowed Charities_; but no account of his family has been given
  by his namesake, William Burton, in his _History of
  Leicestershire_, or by Nichols in his _History_.]

_Hoo._--What is the meaning of this word? In Bedfordshire there are two
houses and estates called by this name, Luton Hoo and Pertenhall Hoo;
and in Norfolk, Suffolk, and Kent are villages so called.

    ARUN.

  [Luton Hoo, in Bedfordshire, was the manor of the family of Hoo,
  or De Hoo, who are said by Sir Henry Chauncy to have been settled
  there before the Norman Conquest. Hasted, in his Kent, says, "Hoo
  comes from the Saxon _hou_, a hill." Ihre derives the word from
  _hoeg_, high. Spelman, vo. _Hoga_, observes that _ho_, _how_,
  signifies mons, collis. Jamieson says "_How_ is certainly no other
  than Isl. _haug_, Suio-Gothic _hoeg_, the name given to sepulchral
  mounds." See also Lemon's _English Etymology_, s. v. _Hough_,
  _how_.]




Replies.


MODERN NAMES OF PLACES.

(Vol. iv., p. 470.)

Your correspondent L. H. J. T. has noticed the corruption of Greek
topographical names, arising from the use of the definite article, which
the ear of a traveller not skilled in the language supposes to be a part
of the name, and so makes _Statines_ or _Satines_ from Athens, _Stives_
from Thebes, &c.

It may be interesting to some readers of "NOTES AND QUERIES" to know
that exactly the same thing has happened in Ireland, and that the
recognised Anglicised forms of several proper names, now stereotyped,
are a combination of the definite article _an_, of the Gaelic or Irish
language, with the name of the place.

For instance, _Nenagh_ in the co. Tipperary is properly _Aonach_ [pron.
_eenagh_], but generally spoken of by the people with the definite
article _an Aonach_, the Aonach, _i.e._ fair, place of a fair or
assembly; and hence by the English made _Nenagh_.

So also the river _Ainge_ [pron. nearly as _Anny_] is usually called an
Ainge, _the_ Ainge; and therefore is now _Nanny_, the Nanny, or Nanny
water, in the co. Meath.

In like manner, the island _Aondruim_ in Loch Cuan, on which stood once
a celebrated monastery, is in Irish always called _an Aondruim_, the
Aondruim, and is now Nandrum or Nantrim Island.

The town of _Newry_ is another instance. It has its name from an ancient
yew tree [in Irish _Iubhair_, pron. nearly as the word _your_] which
stood near it, and was said to have been planted by St. Patrick. Hence
the town is always called _an Iubhair_, the yew tree; which, by
incorporating the article, has been Anglicised _Newry_.

The river _Nore_ in Ossory, is properly _an Eoir_, the Eoir [pron.
_Ore_].

So also the _Navan_ fort near Armagh, is _an Eamhain_, the Eamhain
[pron. nearly as _Avan_].

I might fill a page with other instances, but I shall only mention
another similar corruption in proper names, where after dropping the
_Mac_ the _c_ is retained, in cases where the patronymic begins with a
vowel. Thus the descendants of the Danish family of _Ottar_ became _Mac
Ottar_, and are now Cotter. So _Mac Etigan_ became _Gettigan_; _Mac
Eeoghegan_, Geoghegan; the _c_ being further transmuted into _g_. And
hundreds of similar instances could be given.

It may also be observed that the English very generally caught the
genitive, or oblique case, of the Irish proper names, and from it formed
the name which is now in use amongst the English speaking population.
Thus they heard the Irish speak of the isles _Araun_, _i.e._ the isles
_of Ara_, for _Araun_ is the genitive; and hence they are now the _Aran
Isles_. So also the ford Trim or Druim, in Irish _Ath-Druim_ (the ford
of the long low hill, _vadum Dorsi_), where _Druim_ [pron. nearly
_Trim_] is the genitive of _Drom_ or _Drum_, a long low hill, a back.

The names given to Ireland by medieval writers, after the ancient name
of Scotia had been transferred to _Alban_ (which, by the way, is itself
a genitive, from _Alba_), afford instances of the same thing.

One of the native names of Ireland is _Eri_, or _Eire_, genitive
_Erinn_. From this the Greeks and Romans formed the name _Ierne_, from
the old word _I_, an island--_I-Erinn_, the island _of Eri_. And so we
now have also the genitive _Erin_, as a poetical name of the island. The
Danes, however, retained the absolute form, and called it _Eri-landt_,
Ireland.

So also from the old word _Ibh_, or _Hibh_, a tribe, or country, we have
_Hibh-Erinn_, the tribe, or people of Eri, and hence evidently
_Hibernia_ and _Ivernia_.

    T. D.


PROVERBIAL PHILOSOPHY.--PAROCHIAL LIBRARY AT MAIDSTONE.

(Vol. iv., p. 92.)

As some of your readers may be aware, there is an old and somewhat
valuable library in the vestry of All Saints Church, Maidstone, which
was partly purchased by the parishioners of the executors of Dr. Bray
(who bequeathed his books to any parish which would advance fifty pounds
as a consideration for the value of them), and was afterwards increased
by the munificence of several benefactors.

Up to the year 1810, when the present catalogue was made, it would
appear that but little, or at any rate very insufficient, care was taken
of these books; for Mr. Finch, who rearranged the library and wrote the
catalogue, carefully correcting the inaccuracies in the former one,
declares, in a note that he has placed at the commencement, dated
October 1, 1810, that he "found many valuable books missing, and a still
larger number irretrievably damaged by the incursions of worms and
damp."

The number of volumes missing and decayed amounted to about 100, whilst
the number remaining in the library appears to have been 710, and their
gross value about 165_l._

Since 1810 far greater care seems to have been bestowed on them, for but
few, very few, volumes mentioned in the catalogue then made are missing,
and a daily fire during the winter months tends greatly to prevent their
further injury by damp.

I will not, however, trouble you with any further remarks about the
library itself, but proceed at once to the subject of my note, which is
to offer for your acceptance three proverbs (which I have met with in
reading one of the books) as an addition to the valuable collection
lately sent by your correspondent COWGILL.

The book from which I have derived them is a small quarto, containing
the following tracts or treatises; but whether any or all of them are
now but rarely to be met with, I know not.

  1st. "The Heresiography, or a description of the Hereticks and
  Sectaries of these latter times, by E. Pagitt. 5th edit. London,
  1654."

  2nd. "An apologie for our publick ministerie and infant baptism,
  by William Lyford, B.D. and Minister of the Gospel at Sherborn in
  Dorcetshire. London, 1653."

  3rd. "The Font guarded with XX arguments, containing a compendium
  of that great controversie of Infant Baptism, proving the
  lawfulness thereof; as being grounded on the word of God,
  agreeable to the Practice of all Reformed churches: together with
  the concurrent consent of a whole jury of judicious and pious
  divines. With a word to one Collier and another to Mr. Tombs, in
  the end of the Book. Birmingham, 1651."

  4th. "Vindiciæ, Pædo-Baptismi, or A Vindication of Infant Baptism
  in a Full Answer to Mr. Tombs his twelve arguments alleaged
  against it in his exercitation, and whatsoever is rational or
  material in his answer to Mr. Marshall's sermon. By John Geree,
  M.A. and Preacher of the Word sometime at Tewksbury, but now at
  St. Albanes. London, 1646."

  5th. [Title-page wanting, but it appears to have been this:] "The
  Gangrene of Heresie, or A catalogue of many of the Errours,
  Blasphemies, and Practices of the Sectaries of the time, with some
  observations upon them. By Thomas Edwards, 1650."

  6th. "The Patrimony of Christian Children, or A defence of Infants
  Baptisme prooved to be consonant to the Scriptures and will of God
  against the erroneous positions of the Anabaptists. By Robert
  Cleaver, with the joynt consent of Mr. John Dod. London, 1624."

These six treatises contain from 80 to 220 pages each, and in reading
them I have noted the three following "sententious truths," which I hope
may be thought worthy to be added to the much larger number contributed
by COWGILL. The first is from the lines of Beriah Philophylax to his
friend Mr. Thomas Hall, which is prefixed to his "Font Guarded;" and the
other two from Edwards' "Gangrene of Heresie,"--

      1st. "Answers are Honours to a Scold,
             And make her spirit much more bold."

      2nd. "A spark not quenched may burn down a whole house."

      3rd. "Little sins make way for great, and one brings in all."

    JOHN BRANFILL HARRISON.

  Maidstone.


"A BREATH CAN MAKE THEM AS A BREATH HAS MADE."

(Vol. iv., p. 482.)

With reference to the observations of HENRY H. BREEN upon a well-known
passage in Goldsmith's _Deserted Village_, a little consideration will
convince him that the view taken by D'Israeli and himself is not only
extremely superficial, but that the proposed emendation would entirely
destroy the poet's meaning.

The antithesis is not between flourishing and fading, but between the
difficult restoration of a bold peasantry and the easy reproduction of
princes and lords.

The first branch of the antithesis is between _wealth_ and _men_:

      "Where wealth accumulates and men decay."

It then proceeds to set forth that it matters little whether nobles
flourish or fade, because a breath can make _them_ as easily as it has
originally made them: but not so with a bold peasantry. When once _they_
are destroyed, _they_ can never be replaced.

In fact, so far from the sense requiring the alteration of "makes" into
"_un_makes," the substitution, if we would preserve the author's
meaning, should be "remakes:"

      "Princes and lords may flourish or may fade,
      A breath _remakes them_, as a breath has made."

I only put this in illustration: Heaven forbid I should recommend it as
an improvement!

As for the cited "parallel passages," the best answer that can be given
to _them_ is, that they cease to be parallel passages!

I shall therefore take the liberty to repeat a sentence from MR. BREEN,
with a slight alteration:

  "That Goldsmith wrote the line in question with the word
  'unmakes,' there seems (_every_) reason to doubt."

    A. E. B.

  Leeds.

P.S.--As a mere matter of fact, apart from other considerations,
although a breath from the fountain of honour may create a noble, it
may be questioned whether it would not require something more than a
breath to _un_make him?

  [We have received many other excellent defences of the original
  reading of this passage in Goldsmith. We have selected the present
  as one of the shortest among those which first reached us. We will
  add to it a postscript from the communication of another
  correspondent, J. S. W., showing a curious typographical error
  which has crept into the recent editions of Goldsmith.]

_Passage in the Traveller._--There is a line in the _Traveller_, I may
observe, into which an error of the press, or of some unlucky critic,
has intruded. Goldsmith, speaking of the Swiss, says that he

      "_Breasts_ the keen air, and carols as he goes."

In some editions it is given--

      "_Breathes_ the keen air," &c.

_Breasts_ was doubtless the original word, for it is quoted in Johnson's
_Dictionary_, under the word _Breast_. This alteration, however, does
not, like the supposed change of _unmakes_ into _can make_, affect the
sense.

    J. S. W.

  Stockwell.


BOGATZKY.

(Vol. iii., pp. 478., 526.; Vol. iv., p. 44.)

Perhaps the following Note may prove interesting, as a contribution to
the literary history of Bogatzky's popular work, and as explanatory of
the statement of R. D. H. (Vol. iii., p. 526.), that the book was almost
entirely re-written _by the Rev. H. Venn_.

_The Golden Treasury_ was introduced to English readers through the late
excellent John Thornton, Esq. This gentleman having met with a copy of
the German work, caused it to be translated into English. Of this
translation (in which many of Bogatzky's papers are exchanged for
extracts from English writers) a single copy was printed, interleaved,
and sent to the _Rev. John Berridge_, of Everton, for final revision.
This copy is now before me. The title runs thus: _A Golden Treasury for
the Children of God, whose Treasure is in Heaven; consisting of select
Texts of the Bible, with practical Observations in Prose and Verse, for
every Day in the Year. By C. H. v. Bogatzky: with some Alterations and
Improvements by various Hands. Also a Preface on the right Use of this
Book. Together with a few Forms of Prayer for private Use. "Where your
Treasure is, there will your Heart be also." Matt._ vi. 21. _London:
Printed in the Year_ MDCCLXXV. Then follows the Preface (pp. iii.-xvi.),
written by Mr. Thornton. The rest of the book extends to 374 pages of a
small oblong form. The whole is very copiously annotated by Mr.
Berridge, whose corrections are most important and judicious. He greatly
improved and simplified the language, his chief aim evidently being to
accommodate the book to the use of as large a number of readers as
possible. The humour of the man breaks out ever and anon in cutting
rebukes and sarcasms directed against unsound doctrine: neither
Calvinist nor Arminian, Pharisee nor Antinomian, escape his lash. A
considerable number of papers are either entirely re-written, or very
largely altered; _e.g._ Jan. 29 (by J. Thornton); Feb. 10, 19; April 8,
26; May 2, 3, 16, 20; June 19, 22; Sept. 9, 17, 18, 21, 25; Oct. 10;
Nov. 18; Dec. 1, &c. About forty-three papers are left untouched, and
twenty others have only some verses added by Mr. Berridge. Next, as to
the extracts from English authors: in the interleaved copy the sources
are indicated in Mr. Thornton's handwriting for the first six months;
beyond which there is no indication of the kind. I subjoin a list of the
authors from whom extracts have been made:--

_Aberdeen Bible_, Feb. 17, 22, April 1, 18, June 8; _Mr. Adams_, March
28; _Mr. Bentley_, Jan. 1, 12, April 21; _Mr. Brewer_, April 15;
_Darracot's Scripture Marks_, March 5, April 3; _Mr. De Coetlogon_, June
5; _Mr. Fletcher_, May 4, 5; _Mr. Forster_, Feb. 10, 20; _Dr. Guise_,
June 11; _Bishop Hall_, Feb. 12, 26, March 12, May 3, June 9; _Mr.
Howe_, March 1, April 6; _Mr. Keash (?)_, Feb. 1; _Mr. King_, Jan. 31,
Feb. 8; _Mr. Law_, June 4; _Mr. Mason_, March 29, 30; _Mr. Newton_,
April 17; _Dr. Owen_, Feb. 21, March 15, 21; _Mr. Romaine_, Jan. 29;
_Spencer's Storehouse_, Feb. 16, March 19, 31, April 20, 30, May 29,
June 14, 17; _Mrs. Thornton_, March 10; _Mrs. Wills_, April 19.

I will only add that most of the corrections of Mr. Berridge were
adopted by Mr. Thornton, and have consequently appeared in the London
editions in current use.

    C. P. PH***.


MORAVIAN HYMNS.

(Vol. iv., p. 502.)

John Wesley was at one time of his life a pupil of the Moravians, and
Southey's _Life_ of that remarkable man, like most of his works,
pregnant with interest and erudition, affords a satisfactory answer to
your correspondent's Query. I quote from the 3rd edition of the _Life_,
2 vols., 1846. Of the Moravians he says:--

  "Madness never gave birth to combinations of more _monstrous and
  blasphemous obscenity_ than they did in their fantastic allegories
  and spiritualizations. In such freaks of perverted fancy the
  abominations of the Phallus and the Lingam have unquestionably
  originated; and in some such abominations Moravianism might have
  ended, had it been instituted among the Mingrelian or Malabar
  Christians, where there was no antiseptic influence of surrounding
  circumstances to preserve it from putrescence. Fortunately for
  themselves, and for that part of the heathen world among whom they
  have laboured, and still are labouring with exemplary devotion,
  the Moravians were taught by their assailants to correct this
  perilous error in time."--Vol. i. p. 173.

He adds in a note:

  "The reader who may have perused Rimius's _Narrative of the Rise
  and Progress of the Herrnhuters_, and the 'Responsorial Letters of
  the Theological Faculty of Tübingen' annexed to it [the 2nd
  edition was published London, 1753], will not think this language
  too strong."

In the Appendix, p. 481., Southey further says:

  "The most characteristic parts of the Moravian hymns are _too
  shocking_ to be inserted here: even in the humours and
  extravagances of the Spanish religious poets there is nothing
  which approaches to the monstrous perversion of religious feeling
  in these astonishing productions. The copy which I possess is of
  the third edition printed for James Hutton, 1746. An interesting
  account of James Hutton, who published the _Moravian Hymns_, may
  be seen in the great collection of _Literary Anecdotes_ by Mr.
  Nichols, vol. iii. p. 435. Of their _silliness_ I subjoin only
  such a specimen as may be read without offence:--

      'What is now to children the dearest thing here?
      To be the Lamb's lambkins and chickens most dear;
      Such lambkins are nourished with food which is best,
      Such chickens sit safely and warm in the nest.'

      'And when Satan at an hour
      Comes our chickens to devour,
      Let the children's angels say,
      Those are Christ's chicks--go thy way.'

  "Yet even the _Moravian Hymns_ are equalled by a poem of
  Manchester manufacture in the _Gospel Magazine_ for August, 1808,
  entitled the 'Believer's Marriage in Christ.'"--Southey's _Life of
  Wesley_.

See also Crantz's _History of the Brethren_, translated by Latrobe, 8vo.
London, 1780; _A True and Authentic Account of Andrew Frey_, translated
from the German, London, 1753, an extremely curious work; also _A Solemn
Call on Count Zinzendorf_, by Henry Rimius, London, 1754.

    JARLTZBERG.

  December 30th, 1851.


Replies to Minor Queries.

_Inveni portum_ (Vol. v., p. 10.).--This couplet, which occurs at the
close of the second volume of _Gil Blas_, is a version of the following
Greek epigram among those of uncertain authors in the _Anthologia_:

            Εἰς τύχην
      Ἐλπὶς καὶ σὺ Τύχη, μέγα χαίρετε· τὸν λιμέν' εὗρον.
      Οὐδὲν ἐμοὶ χ' ὑμῖν· παίζετε τοὺς μετ' ἐμέ.

It is a slight alteration of the translation given by William Lilly, Sir
Thomas More's friend and schoolfellow, and occurs, with Sir Thomas
More's version, in the _Progymnasmata_ prefixed to the first edition of
More's _Epigrams_, a very elegant volume, printed under the care of
Beatus Rhinanus by Frobenius, at Basle, in 1520: small 4to. The
frontispiece is by Holbein:

            "T. MORI DE CONTEMPTU FORTUNÆ.

      "Jam portum inveni, Spes et Fortuna valete.
        Nil mihi vobiscum est, ludite nunc alios."

            "G. LILII.

      "Inveni portum. Spes et Fortuna valete.
        Nil mihi vobiscum, ludite nunc alios."

There is a longer epigram, also by an uncertain author, in the First
Book of the _Anthologia_, the first lines of which differ but slightly.
It runs thus:

      Ἐλπὶς καὶ σὺ Τύχη, μέγα χαίρετε· τὴν ὁδὸν εὗρον·
      Οὐκ ἔτι γὰρ σφετέροις ἐπιτέρπομαι· ἔῤῥετε ἄμφω,
      Οὕνεκεν ἐν μερόπεσσι πολυπλανέες μάλα ἐστέ.
      κ. τ. λ.

The epigram has been very frequently translated. We have Latin versions
by W. Morel, Grotius, and others; and several Italian and French
versions. Mr. Merivale has thus rendered it:

      "Fortune and Hope farewell! I've found the port:
      You've done with me: go now, with others sport!"

Thomas Moore has given us a spirited paraphrase of it.

    S.W. SINGER.

  Manor Place, South Lambeth.

_Quarter Waggoner_ (Vol. v., p. 11.).--As the editor, in the exercise of
his official functions, may class this scrap with the _Replies_, it
cannot be amiss to state that I offer its contents as mere conjectures.

In the _Sea grammar_ of captain John Smith, which was published in 1627,
we have a list of books adapted to the use of those who would _learn to
observe the altitude_, to _prick_ their _card_, or _say_ their
_compass_. It is as follows:

  "Master _Wrights_ Errours of nauigation. Master _Tapps_ Sea-mans
  kalender. The art of nauigation. The sea regiment. The sea-mans
  secret. _Waggoner_. Master _Gunters_ workes. The sea-mans glasse
  for the scale. The new attracter for variation. Master _Wright_
  for vse of the globe. Master _Hewes_ for the same."

It thus appears that _Waggoner_ was either the title of a book, or the
name of an author; and we may infer, from the absence of particulars,
that it was quite familiar to the seamen of that period--as much so as
_Charles'-wain_. May it not indicate Lucas Jansz _Wagenaer_ of
Enchuisen, author of the _Spieghel der zeevaerdt_, or mirror of
navigation, published at Leyden in 1585. The _Spieghel_ became a
standard work; and a translation of it by Anthony Ashley was printed at
London, with a dedication to sir Christopher Hatton, about the year
1588. Mr. Joseph Ames, who gives the title of this translation,
observes: "Perhaps the sailors from this book call their sea charts
_Wagenars_." He was the son of a merchant-captain, and passed his life
as a ship chandler in Wapping: I need not search for a better witness.
With regard to the word _Quarter_, it seems to be an abbreviation of
quarter-deck; and if so, _Quarter Waggoner_ would mean the quarter-deck
charts, or the charts which were supplied to the commander of a ship for
the use of himself and the other officers.

    BOLTON CORNEY.

_Cibber's Lives of the Poets_ (Vol. v., p. 25.).--MR. CROSSLEY says that
none of Johnson's biographers appear to have known that the prospectus
which he has sent you was furnished by Dr. Johnson; but of this fact he
gives no other proof than his own opinion that "the internal evidence is
decisive." Now I really must say, that to my poor judgment nothing can
be less like Johnson's peculiar style; and, moreover, MR. CROSSLEY, who
quotes Mr. Croker's note (p. 818., ed. 1848) on this subject, has
certainly not read that note accurately, for the object of that note was
to endeavour to account for Johnson's having frequently and positively
asserted that _Cibber had nothing to do with these lives_, of which MR.
CROSSLEY would have us suppose he wrote the prospectus for Cibber. If
MR. CROSSLEY will read more carefully the note referred to, which is
half Boswell's and half Croker's, and also another note (also referred
to), p. 504., he will see that it is impossible that Johnson could have
written this prospectus.

As I happen to be addressing MR. CROSSLEY, I take the liberty of asking
whether he has yet been able to lay his hands on Pope's Imitation of
Horace, _printed by Curll_ in 1716 (see "N. & Q.," Vol. iv., pp. 122.
139.), and which he tells us he possesses. I wonder and should be sorry
that _such a curiosity_ should be lost or even mislaid.

    C.

_Poniatowski Gems_ (Vol. v., p. 30.).--A. O. O. D. is informed that a
portion of these gems were sold by Christie and Manson about the second
week in June of last year, under an order of the Court of Chancery, on
account of the estate of the late Lord Monson. The contents of one
cabinet were alone put up, and the auctioneers can, no doubt, supply the
particulars that A. O. O. D. requires; or more general information might
possibly be obtained from the solicitors, Messrs. Pooley and Beisly, 1.
Lincoln's Inn Fields.

    M----N.

_Dial Motto at Karlsbad_ (Vol. iv., pp. 471. 507.).--I do not think it
difficult to throw light upon the Karlsbad inscription sent to you by
HERMES. I believe that there is a mistake either by the inscriber or the
transcriber, and that the word CEdIt ought to be written CeDIt. The
chrono-grammatic letters or numerals would then be MDCCVVVVIIIIIIIIII =
MDCCXXX = 1730. There are, however, as you have printed it, three other
capital letters, but I observe they are not in the same type as the
numerals. The question then arises, how do they appear in the original
inscription? do they all appear there, or only the first two. It is
possible that they, _i.e._ H. H. T., may be the initials of the name of
the then owner of the house I should like this explanation better if the
only capitals, not numerals, were H. H., the initials of the first two
words of the inscription, and unmingled with the numerals. It would then
be H. H. MDCCXXX, or as it would appear upon a house of the present day:

      H. H.
      1730.

It is probable that by inquiry at Karlsbad, if it were worth while, the
name of the owner and date of the house might afford a certain solution
of his difficulty. The doubtful letters may be the initials of the maker
of the dial.

    GRIFFIN.

P.S. Upon what authority does your correspondent E. H. D. D. (Vol. iv.,
p. 507.) assert that "E in such compositions stands for 250?"

_Passage in Jeremy Taylor_ (Vol. iv., p. 435.).--I have to thank your
correspondent F. A. for calling my attention to a passage in the present
edition of Jeremy Taylor, in which the bishop cites a "common saying"
concerning Repentance. I had already discovered the error which F. A.
alludes to, my attention having been called to the words in question, by
finding them quoted by Jackson (Sermon on Luke, xiii. 6. _et seq._); and
a MS. note in the margin by a former possessor of the volume gave me the
true account of the sentence.

I am living at a distance from libraries, and without the opportunity of
examining questions; but I believe F. A. will find that he has slightly
misunderstood L'Estrange; the sentence in question _not_ being found in
Coverdale's translation of the Bible.

    C. P. E.

_Aue Trici and Gheeze Ysenoudi_ (Vol. i., pp. 215. 267.).--These two
nuns belonged to the convent of St. Margaret at Gouda. In 1714 there
still existed in the library of that city a book entitled _Coll==tarius_
(Commentarius) _supra Psalmos_.[2] This work, written by Peter Por of
Floref, and dedicated to John of Arckel, bishop of Utrecht, was
transcribed on parchment in the year 1454 by seven nuns of the above
convent, these were:

      Maria Joannis,
      _Geza Yzenoude_,
      _Aua Trici_,
      Jacoba Gerardi,
      Agatha Nicolai,
      Maria Martini,
      en Maria Gerardi.

  [Footnote 2: Sic in MSS. Legendumne co[=m]tarius?]

On the back of the MS. is a list of the books belonging to the convent:
these were then seventy in number.

Lambertus Wilhelmi, a monk of Sion Abbey, and director of these nuns,
composed in the year 1452 a _History of the Convent of St. Margaret at
Gouda_, by order of its superintendent, Heymanus Florentii, a monk of
'S. Gravezande. This convent was burnt in 1572 by one of Lumey's
captains, Hans Aulterman, who for his many crimes was condemned on the
11th of April, 1573, and burnt alive at the gates of Gouda.

The Nicholas de Wit mentioned in the Query was prior of the monastery of
St. Michael, near Schoonhoven. (See further T. Walvisch, _Beschrÿving
van Gouda_, II. pp. 123-172.)

    ELSEVIER.

  Leyden, Navorscher, Jan. 1852.

_Rev. John Paget_ (Vol. iv., p. 133.).--Of this clergyman the following
mention is made in the _Resolutions of the States General_:

  "9 January, 1607. Op te requeste van John Paget, predikand van de
  Engelsche regimenten, is geordonneert de selve te stellen in
  handen van den Ovesten Horace Vere, Ridder, omme ordre te stellen,
  dat den suppl. van syn tractament mach worden betaelt."

  9 January, 1607. Touching the request of John Paget, chaplain of
  the English regiments, is ordained that the same be placed in the
  hands of the Colonel Horace Vere, Knight, that provision may be
  made for the payment of the suppliant's salary.

From the register of a marriage celebrated at Leyden the 7th of January,
1649, between Mathys Paget, smith, and Maria Picters Del Tombe, both of
that city, it would appear that other members of the Paget family have
resided there.

    ELSEVIER.

  Leyden, Navorscher, Jan. 1852.

The Rev. John Paget doubtless belonged to an English or Scotch family,
sometimes also called Pagett, or Pagetius. John Paget, who was the first
minister of the English church in Amsterdam, came there in 1607, and
preached his introductory sermon on the 5th of February, in the chapel
prepared for that purpose: his formal induction took place in the month
of April, in the same year, and here he remained twenty-nine years.
Thomas Paget, invited from Blackeley in England, was inducted in
November 1639, and departed the 29th of August 1646, for Shrewsbury.
Robert Paget, or Pagetius, minister of the Scotch congregation at
Dordrecht from 1638 to 1685, "was a man of extensive biblical knowledge,
but of extreme modesty." When the English church in Amsterdam was
offered him, he could not be prevailed upon to accept it. With Jacob
Borstius he lived on terms of close intimacy.

Consult the _Kerkelÿk Alphabeth_ of Veeris, Wagenaar, _Beschrÿving van
Amsterdam_, and Balen _Beschrÿving van Dordt_; also _The History of the
Scottish Church at Rotterdam_, by the Rev. William Steven, M.A.,
Edinburgh and Rotterdam, 1832, and Schotel, _Kerkelÿk Dordrecht_, vol.
i. p. 457., and the note (2), vol. ii. p. 217., where many particulars
concerning the Pagets, especially Robert, are found. It is, however,
probable that CRANMORE may obtain more information touching his family
in England than in this country. In Töcher's _Gelehrten Lexicon_ mention
is made of Ephraim, Eusebius, and Wilhelmus Paget, all of whom resided
in England.

We also read in the _Lÿste van de Namen der Predikanten in de Provincie
van Utrecht_, by H. van Rhenen, 1705, p. 66., that Robert Paget, an
Englishman, and English preacher at Dordt, nephew of Thomas Paget, was
invited to Utrecht in 1655, but declined. He remained at Dordrecht, and
died there in 1684.

    V. D. N.

  Rotterdam, Navorscher, Jan. 1852.

_Lines on the Bible_ (Vol. iv., p. 473.).--"Within that awful volume
lies," &c. These lines are Walter Scott's. They are spoken by the White
Lady of Avenel, in _The Monastery_. It appears that they were copied by
Lord Byron into his Bible, for they are inserted at the end of
Galignani's 1-vol. edition of Byron's Works (Paris, 1826), among the
"_attributed_ pieces," as "lines found in Lord Byron's Bible." This I
believe is the only authority on which the compiler of the volume
referred to by your correspondent can have supposed his lordship to have
been the author. In Murray's editions they have no place, nor even in
Galignani's later editions.

    B. R. I.

  [We are indebted to many other correspondents for similar
  replies.]

_Dial Mottoes_ (Vol. iv., p. 471.).--The following is an inscription
which I copied from a dial-plate in the churchyard of Kirk-Arbory, Isle
of Man:

        "Thomas Kirkall de
          Bolton Fecit.
      Horula dum quota sit
      Quæritur hora fugit.
            1678."

There is a coat of arms also, but the tinctures are not marked; viz.
Quarterly of three coats: first and fourth, three roundels in fess,
between two barrulets; second, on a bend three mullets; third, a chevron
between three lozenges.

    T. H. KERSLEY, B.A.

_Martial's Distribution of Hours_ (Vol. iv., pp. 273., 332.).--I ought
perhaps to thank THEOPHYLACT for good intention in answering, not the
question I did ask, but that which he thinks I "might have asked."

My real question was based upon an assumption, the truth of which
THEOPHYLACT denies: his reply therefore is rather a challenge to
premiss, than an answer to the question.

I totally dissent from him in understanding "quies lassis" in any sense
short of absolute _recumbent_ repose: "finis," which he takes as the
real commencement of the siesta, I understand as its conclusion: nor am
I aware of any, except the last final quies, to which the term _finis_
would be applicable.

Neither can I admit, upon the authority of THEOPHYLACT, that there was
any gradual or partial cessation of business in Rome during the hour
which we call "between eleven and twelve o'clock in the forenoon."
Julius Cæsar left home, commenced the business of the senate, was
surrounded by thronging applicants, and was assassinated--all during
that hour: and, unless THEOPHYLACT can show that therefore, and on that
account, it became distasteful to succeeding emperors, he must excuse me
from admitting his interpretation.

    A. E. B.

_Nelson's Signal_ (Vol. iv., p. 473.).--I send you Nelson's exact words
as conveyed by signal at Trafalgar, as noted down by several ships in
the fleet:

      England [253]
      expects [269]
      that    [863]
      every   [261]
      man     [471]
      will    [958]
      do      [220]
      his     [370]
      d         [4]
      u        [21]
      t        [19]
      y        [24]

Let me add, that the refrain of the best song on the Battle of
Trafalgar, gives the exact words of the signal:

      "From line to line the signal ran,
      England expects that every man
            This day will do his duty."

You should have heard this chanted in the singing-days of

    W. H. S.

_Cooper's miniature, &c._ (Vol. v. p. 17.).--I have a painting on copper
of Oliver Cromwell. It is oval, and about six inches by four. It
resembles the engravings of him which have Cooper's name attached to
them. In the distance is a "white horse," faintly sketched in. My
father, in whose possession it long was, set a very great value upon it.
I have not had sufficient opportunity to inquire--Did ever Cooper paint
in oil?

    B. G.

_Roman Funeral Pile_ (Vol. iv., p. 381.).--The ceremony of a Roman
funeral concluded with a feast, which was usually a supper given to the
friends and relatives of the deceased; and sometimes provisions were
distributed to the people. (Vid. Adams' _Roman Hist._, 3rd edit. p.
283.) Basil Kennett, in his _Antiquities of Rome_, published 1776,
further observes (p. 361.) that--

  "The feasts, celebrated to the honour of the deceased, were either
  private or publick. The private feasts were termed _silicernia_,
  from _silex and coena_, as if we should say _suppers made on a
  stone_. These were prepared both for the _dead_ and the _living_.
  The repast designed for the dead consisting commonly of beans,
  lettuces, bread and eggs, or the like, was laid on the tomb for
  the ghosts to come out and eat, as they fancied they would; and
  what was left they burnt on the stone."

No authority is cited either by Adams or Kennett for the custom, but
your correspondent _John ap William ap John_ might perhaps refer to
"_Petri Morestelli Pompa Feralis, sive justa Funebria Veterum_," with
some probability of success in finding the subject there treated at
large.

    FRANCISCUS.

_Barrister_ (Vol. iv., p. 472.).--The derivation of this word proposed
by W. Y. can only be looked upon as a joke, as he himself seems to
regard it. "Roister" can have no more to do with it than "oyster" has
with such words as "songster, spinster, maltster, punster, tapster,
webster," &c., in which "ster" is the A.S. termination to denote one
whose business is "song, or spinning," &c. Thus from the Mediæval Latin
"barra" we get "barraster, one whose business is at the bar;" this is
confirmed by the old mode of spelling the word, viz., "barrester and
barraster." See Spelman's _Glossary_, v. Cancellarius--

  "Dicuntur etiam _cancelli_ septa curiarum quæ _barras_ vocant;
  atque inde Juris candidati causas illic agentes, Budæo
  _Cancellarii_, ut nobiscum _Barrestarii_."

And again--

  "_Barrasterius_, Repagularis Causidicus."

    J. EASTWOOD.

_Meaning of Dray_ (Vol. iv., p. 209.).--_Dray_ is a squirrel's nest.

  "A boy has taken three little young squirrels in their nest or
  _drey_."--White's _Selborne_, p. 333. Bohn's edition.

To which is appended the following note:--

  "The squirrel's nest is not only called a _drey_ in Hampshire, but
  also in other counties; in Suffolk it is called a bay. The word
  _drey_, though now provincial, I have met with in some of our old
  writers."--_Mitford_.

    PANTAGRUEL.

_Tregonwell Frampton_ (Vol. iv., p. 474.; Vol. v., p. 16.).--In the
_History of the British Turf_, by James Christie Whyte, Esq. (London,
Colburn, 2 vols. 8vo. 1840), T. R. W. will meet with a sketch of the
life of Mr. Frampton, together with an inquiry into the truth of the
well known anecdote respecting his cruelty to his horse Dragon. Mr.
Chafin, in his _Anecdotes of Cranbourne Chase_ (London, 1818), p. 47.,
refers to him, and prints one or two curious original letters from him.
Mr. Whyte illustrates his first volume by a portrait of Mr. Frampton.

    CRANMORE.

_Vermin, Parish Payments of, &c._ (Vol. iv., p. 208.).--There is no
doubt but that nearly all country parishes paid at one time for the
destruction of different kinds of vermin; but this practice is now
entirely discontinued. The following are the prices paid twenty-five
years ago by the parish of Corsham, Wilts:--

Vipers, 6_d._ each; slowworms or blindworms, 3_d._ each; rats, 1_d._
each (the tails only were required to be brought); sparrows' heads,
6_d._ per dozen, (meaning the old birds); sparrows' eggs and young
birds, 4_d._ per dozen.

I shall never forget, when a boy, and my father was churchwarden, the
tricks the young lads and boys used to play in order to palm off other
birds' eggs and young birds for sparrows. One young rascal actually
painted the eggs very cleverly to imitate the sparrows, till I
discovered it. Young birds of all kinds were brought, and many dozens
paid for that were not sparrows; as it was impossible to tell the young
birds of many of the hard billed kinds from the sparrow. At last the
parish gave up paying for the eggs or young birds, but gave 1_s._ per
dozen for the heads of old sparrows, and vast numbers were brought
throughout the winter; and then attempts were made to substitute other
birds' heads, which were in many cases paid for. The next year the
parish agreed only to pay for the whole birds, so that no deception
could be practised. When the New Poor Law came into operation, all these
payments were stopped. Glead was a provincial term for the kite and
buzzard, the ringtail for the hen harrier hawk, and greashead or
greyhead for the female kestrel or greyheaded falcon. In most of the
Wiltshire parishes 6_d._ per head was paid for the hedgehog, as the
farmers always believed they sucked the teats of cows when laid down in
the fields. The badger was also paid for in some places.

    J. K.

  North Wilts.

_Alterius Orbis Papa_ (Vol. iii., p. 497.).--The origin of this title
is, I think, still open to explanation, and in offering one which I find
recorded in Lambard's _Perambulation of Kent_, 1596, pp. 80, 81. I trust
the quaint but interesting style of that learned antiquary and historian
will be a sufficient excuse to your readers for its insertion at length
_verbatim et literatim_:

  "The whole Province of this Bishopricke of Canterbury, was at the
  first divided by Theodorus (the seventh Bishop) into five Dioceses
  only: howbeit, in processe of time it grew to twentie and one,
  besides itselfe, leaving to Yorke (which by the first institution
  should have had as many as it) but Durham, Carleil, and Chester
  only. And whereas by the same ordinance of Gregorie, neither of
  these Archbishops ought to be inferiour to other, save onely in
  respect of the priority of their consecration, Lanfranc (thinking
  it good reason that he should make a conquest of the English
  clergie, since his maister, King William, had vanquished the whole
  nation), contended at Windsor with Thomas Norman (Archbishop of
  Yorke) for the primacie, and there (by judgement before Hugo, the
  Pope's Legate) recovered it from him: so that ever since the one
  is called _Totius Angliæ primas_, and the other _Angliæ primas_,
  without any further addition. Of which judgement, one (forsooth)
  hath yielded this great reason: that even as the Kentish people,
  by an auncient prerogative of manhood, do challenge the first
  front in each battel, from the Inhabitants of other countries; so
  the Archbishop of their Shyre, ought by good congruence to be
  preferred before the rest of the Bishops of the whole Realme.
  Moreover, whereas before time, the place of this Archbishop in the
  generall Councell was to sit next to the Bishop of Sainct
  Ruffines, Anselmus, the successor of this Lanfranc (for recompence
  of the good service that hee had done, in ruffling against
  Priests' wives, and resisting the King for the investiture of
  clerks) was by Pope Urbane endowed with this accession of honour,
  that he and his Successours should from thencefoorth have place in
  all generall councels, at the Pope's right foote, who then said
  withall. 'Includamus hunc in orbe nostro, tanquam alterius orbis
  Papam.'"

    FRANCISCUS.

_Dido and Æneas_ (Vol. iv., p. 423.).--I beg leave to transcribe for A.
A. D. the following passage from the _Facetiæ Cantabrigiensis_, p. 95.
(London, Charles Mason, 1836):

  "Porson observing that he could pun on any subject, a person
  present defied him to do so on the Latin gerunds, which however he
  immediately did in the following admirable couplet:

      'When Dido found Æneas would not come,
      She mourned in silence, and was DI-DO-DUM.'"

I have also seen these lines attributed to Porson in an old volume of
_The Mirror_. Of any other authorities I have no knowledge.

    J. S. W.

  Stockwell.

_Compositions during the Protectorate_ (Vol. iv., pp. 406. 490.).--W. H.
L. suspects that there is an error in the list of these compositions for
Lincolnshire, as given in Oldfield's _History of Wainfleet_, and asks,
"Where is there any account or list of these?" H. F. refers W. H. L. to
a small volume entitled _A Catalogue of the Lords, Knights, and
Gentlemen that have compounded for their Estates_. London, 1655. I have
compared Oldfield's list with the reprint of the _Catalogue_ (Chester,
1733), and find that, with some slight exceptions, they agree. Oldfield,
however, omits the following compositions for Lincolnshire:

                                                    £   _s._  _d._
      "Benson, Clement, of North Kelsey,
      Gent.                                        120   0     0

      Burcroft, Thomas, late of Waltham,
      _pro_ Frances and Jane, his sisters           70   0     0

      Dalton, John, late of Barton on
      _Humber_                                      46   0     0

      Fines, Morris, of Christhead (Kirkstead)      50   0     0

      Leesing, Thomas, of North Somercotes          12   7     6

      Monson, Sir John, of South Carleton         2642   0     0

      Moore, Alexander, of Grantham                350   0     0

      Manson, Sir John, Jun., of North
      Thorpe                                       133   0     0

      Thorold, Joseph, of Boston, Gent.             96   0     0

      Whichcoat, Edward, of Bishop's Norton,
      Esq., with 50_l._ per annum
      settled                                      513   0     0."

There are also a few discrepancies in the amounts of the compositions,
but none of any importance.

Roger Adams, the publisher of the edition of the _Catalogue_ printed at
Chester in 1733, says, in the preliminary address to his subscribers,
that--

  "The Catalogue was printed five years before the miserable scene
  of oppression (by sequestration) closed. To supply the defects of
  it, I apply'd many ways, first to _Goldsmith's Hall_, where I was
  told the latter sequestrations were generally imposed; but the
  haste my friend was in, and some discouragements he met with,
  rendered this application unsuccessful."

The error which W. H. L. suspects in Oldfield's list, may probably be
corrected by application at Goldsmith's Hall.

    P. T.

I was aware of the work, _A Catalogue, &c._, which contains also the
error alluded to at p. 406. Will H. F. be so obliging as to say from
what materials that work was compiled, and how the whole business of the
compositions was managed? Some part of it was carried on at Goldsmith's
Hall. Evelyn probably alludes to the compositions at p. 311. of vol. i.
of his _Diary_, edition of 1850.

    W. H. L.




Miscellaneous.


NOTES ON BOOKS, SALES, CATALOGUES, ETC.

When we consider how many indications are still discoverable, by those
who know how to look for them, of the influence which the incursions of
the Danes and Northmen into Britain have exercised upon our language,
customs, and social and political condition; and that even the most
cursory glance at the map of these islands will show in so many local
names indisputable evidence of Danish occupation--evidence which is
amply confirmed by many of our archaisms or provincialisms, our popular
customs and observances,--when these things are considered, it is
obvious that a work which should give us the result of these incursions,
if written by a competent hand, must prove of great and general
interest. Just such a book has been issued by Mr. Murray, under the
title of _An Account of the Danes and Norwegians in England, Scotland,
and Ireland_, by J. J. A. Worsaae. All who had the pleasure of making
Mr. Worsaae's acquaintance when he visited this country in 1846-47, were
aware that he possessed two qualifications essentially necessary for the
proper execution of the task which he had undertaken. For his
archæological acquirements were made patent (even to those who were
unable to study his various antiquarian publications in Danish and
German) by the English version of his _Primæval Antiquities of Denmark_;
while his thorough mastery over our language was such as to enable him
to pursue his researches into the period of our country's history which
he proposed to illustrate, without the slightest let or hindrance. With
a theme, then, which may be considered as novel as it is interesting
(for it is the first attempt to view the subject _from the Danish
side_), and with such abilities to do it justice, it is no wonder that
Mr. Worsaae has produced a work which will, we are sure, be found to
possess the double merit of not only gratifying the antiquary, but also
of interesting, instructing, and amusing the general reader.

To form a complete Encyclopædia of Classical Antiquity, it was necessary
that to the _Dictionaries of Greek and Roman Antiquities_, and of _Greek
and Roman Biography and Mythology_, should be added a _Dictionary of
Greek and Roman Geography_. That want is in the course of being
supplied. The first Quarterly Part of such a _Dictionary_, called, for
the sake of uniformity, "_of Greek and Roman Geography_," but including
even Scriptural names, and so being in reality a _Dictionary of Ancient
Geography_, edited by Dr. Smith, written by the principal contributors
to the former works, and illustrated by numerous woodcuts, has just been
issued. It equals its predecessors in its claims to the support of all
students and lovers of classical learning; and we know no higher praise.

We learn from _The Athenæum_ that Mr. George Stephens, the translator of
Tegner's beautiful epic _Frithiof's Saga_, and whose intimate
acquaintance with the early literature of Sweden has been shown by the
collection of legends of that country which he has edited in conjunction
with Hylten-Cavallius, and by the various works superintended by him for
the _Svenska Fornskrift-Sällskapet_, a sort of Stockholm Camden Society,
has removed to Copenhagen in consequence of his having been appointed
Professor of the English Language and Literature in the University
there. The subject of his first course of lectures--to be delivered in
the present month--is, Chaucer's Canterbury Tales. After this we shall
be quite prepared to hear of a Danish translation of this masterpiece of
the Father of English Poetry, as a companion to the recently published
Swedish translations of Shakspeare.

BOOKS RECEIVED.--_The Rhymed Chronicle of Edward Manlove concerning the
Liberties and Customs of the Lead Mines within the Wapentake of
Wirksworth, Derbyshire_, &c., edited by Thomas Tapping, Esq. This little
tract (which with its valuable Glossary, List of Cases, &c., occupies
but forty pages) is an extremely curious book; and the manner in which
it has been edited reflects great credit upon Mr. Tapping.--_Neander's
General History of the Christian Religion and Church_, vol. vi., forms
the new volume of Bohn's _Standard Library_. The same indefatigable
publisher has issued, as the new volume of his Classical Library, _The
Odes of Pindar, literally translated into English Prose_, by Dawson W.
Turner, M.A.; and, as if this was not sufficient, he has added the
_Metrical Version by the late Abraham Moore_--a translation which he
pronounces, and with great justice, to be distinguished for "poetry,
scholarship, and taste."


BOOKS AND ODD VOLUMES

WANTED TO PURCHASE.

JOURNAL OF THE GEOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF DUBLIN. Vol. I. Part I. (Several
Copies are wanting, and it is believed that many are lying in London or
Dublin.)

CH. THILLON (DE HALLE) NOUVELLE COLLECTION DES APOCRYPHES. Leipsic,
1832.

THEOBALD'S SHAKSPEARE RESTORED, ETC. 4to. 1726.

A SERMON preached at Fulham in 1810 by the REV. JOHN OWEN of Paglesham,
on the death of Mrs. Prowse, Wicken Park, Northamptonshire (Hatchard).

FÜSSLEIN, JOH. CONRAD, BEYTRÄGE ZUR ERLÄUTERUNG DER
KIRCHEN-REFORMATIONS-GESCHICHTE DES SCHWEITZERLANDES. 5 vols. Zurich,
1741.

  [Star symbol] Letters, stating particulars and lowest price,
  _carriage free_ to be sent to MR. BELL, Publisher of "NOTES AND
  QUERIES," 186. Fleet Street.


Notices to Correspondents.

_We have to regret being compelled to postpone until next week a
valuable communication from the_ REV. JOSEPH MENDHAM _on the_ INDEX
EXPURGATORIUS.

W. F. S. _will find the subject of_ MORGANATIC MARRIAGES _treated in
our_ 2nd Vol., pp. 72. 125. 231. 261.

WILHELM, FRANZ ADOLPH, GERMANUS. _A letter will reach the accomplished
lady to whom our correspondents refer, if addressed to_ 69. _Dean
Street, Soho; or Craven Hill Cottage, Bayswater._

D. E. N. _will find the lines_:

      "Her voice was ever soft, gentle, and low,
      An excellent thing in woman."

_in_ King Lear, Act V. sc. 3.

G. S. M. (Dublin) _will, we think, find all the information of which he
is in search, in the Rev. J. C. Robertson's_ How shall we Conform to the
Litany, _of which a new edition has, we believe, recently been published
by Pickering._

ED. S. JACKSON. _We hope to write privately to this correspondent._

Sir J. EMERSON TENNENT'S _Reply to_ DN. _reached us at too late a period
for insertion in this Number._

JOHN N. BAGNALL _will find his Query replied to in our last_ No. p. 39.

W. P. A. _We hope to be able to give a very satisfactory Reply in a
short time._

REPLIES RECEIVED--_Damasked Linen--Cabal--Planets of the Month--Apple
Pie Order--Wyle Cop--Quarter Waggoner--Priory of Hertford--Epigram on
Erasmus, &c., from_ J. R., _Cork--Number of the Children of
Israel--Lowey of Tonbridge--Three Estates of the Realm--Richly
deserved--Parish Registers--Objective and Subjective--Passage in
Goldsmith--Conjunction of Planets, &c., from_ A. A. D.--_Lines on the
Bible--Many Children at a Birth--Meaning of Stickle--Head of the
Saviour, and others, from_ CLERICUS, _Dublin--John of Halifax--Portraits
of Wolfe--Introduction of Stops, and Lives of the Poets--Preached
in a Pulpit--Royal Library, &c., from our valued correspondent_
C.--_They that touch pitch, &c., from_ ESTE--_Marriage Tithe in
Wales--Cockney--Smothering Hydrophobic Patients--Moravian Hymns--Old
Morm--Age of Trees--New Zealand Legend--Chattes of Hazelle, &c., from_
J. K.--_Dictionary of Quotations--Dr. Johnson and Cibber's
Lives--Praed's Charade--Verses on Clarendon._

_Neat Cases for holding the Numbers of_ "N. & Q." _until the completion
of each Volume are now ready, price_ 1_s._ 6_d._, _and may be had by
order of all booksellers and newsmen._

"NOTES AND QUERIES" _is published at noon on Friday, so that the Country
Booksellers may receive Copies in that night's parcels, and deliver them
to their Subscribers on the Saturday._




Just published, 18mo. cloth, with Wood Engravings, price 2_s._

  JOURNAL of the BISHOP of COLOMBO through a PORTION of his DIOCESE:
  including an Account of the First Episcopal Visit to the Islands
  of Mauritius and the Sechelles, from February to September 1850.

  In fcp. 8vo. price 1_s._ 6_d._ with a New Map of the Bishop's
  Route.


JOURNAL of the BISHOP of CAPETOWN'S VISITATION TOUR in 1850.

  The Journal herein recorded occupied nine months and was performed
  mostly in a waggon or on foot, through the Karroo, the Orange
  Sovereignty, British Kaffraria, and the Eastern Province. The
  above, with the Bishop's Journal of 1848, in One Volume, cloth,
  price 36s.

  Fcp. 8vo. cloth, sewed, price 2_s._; cloth, gilt edges 2_s._ 6_d._


VERSES for 1851; in Commemoration of the Third Jubilee of the Society
for the Propagation of the Gospel. Edited by the Rev. ERNEST HAWKINS.

  Fcp. 8vo. with Wood Engravings, price 5_s._ cloth.


INDIAN MISSIONS in GUIANA. By the Rev. W. H. BRELL.

  "A publication like this is peculiarly well-timed at the moment
  when the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel is celebrating
  its Jubilee. The volume before us will tell the nature of the work
  which is being quietly done by the missionaries of this Society in
  foreign parts. There is an immensity of much interesting detail
  throughout this volume, and we trust it may obtain a wide
  circulation."--_English Review._


THE GOSPEL MISSIONARY: a Magazine of Missionary and Colonial
Intelligence, addressed chiefly to the Humbler Members of our
Congregations and the Children of our Schools. Published Monthly, price
One Half-penny.

  Vol. I., containing Nos. 1. to 12. neatly bound in cloth, is now
  ready, price 1_s._

  Country Subscribers are requested to order through their
  Booksellers.

  Published for the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, by
  GEORGE BELL. 186. Fleet Street, London.


IRISH ETHNOLOGY SOCIALLY AND POLITICALLY CONSIDERED; embracing a General
Outline of the Celtic and Saxon Races, with Practical Inferences. By
GEORGE ELLIS, M.B., T.C.D. Fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons,
Ireland.

  Dublin: HODGES & SMITH.

  London: HAMILTON, ADAMS & CO.


Second edition, 12mo., cloth 3_s._, with Illustrations.

  THE BELL, its Origin, History, and Uses. By the Rev. ALFRED GATTY,
  Vicar of Ecclesfield.

  "A new and revised edition of a very varied, learned, and amusing
  essay on the subject of bells."--_Spectator._

  GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street.


Vols. I. and II. now ready.

  Elegantly bound in ultramarine cloth, gilt edges, price 6s. each.

  GIRLHOOD OF SHAKSPEARE'S HEROINES. A series of Fifteen Tales. By
  MARY COWDEN CLARKE. Periodically, in One Shilling Books, each
  containing a complete Story.

  Vol. I. Price 6_s._

      Tale I. PORTIA: THE HEIRESS OF BELMONT.
      Tale II. THE THANE'S DAUGHTER.
      Tale III. HELENA: THE PHYSICIAN'S ORPHAN.
      Tale IV. DESDEMONA; THE MAGNIFICO'S CHILD.
      Tale V. MEG AND ALICE; THE MERRY MAIDS OF WINDSOR.

      Vol. II. Price 6_s._

      Tale VI. ISABELLA; THE VOTARESS.
      Tale VII. KATHARINA AND BIANCA; THE SHREW, AND THE DEMURE.
      Tale VIII. OPHELIA; THE ROSE OF ELSINORE.
      Tale IX. ROSALIND AND CELIA; THE FRIENDS.
      Tale X. JULIET; THE WHITE DOVE OF VERONA.

      Vol. III. (In progress.)

      Tale XI. BEATRICE AND HERO; THE COUSINS.
      Tale XII. OLIVIA; THE LADY OF ILLYRIA.

  SMITH & CO., 136. Strand; and SIMPKIN & CO., Stationers' Hall Court.


WESTERN LIFE ASSURANCE AND ANNUITY SOCIETY 3. PARLIAMENT STREET, LONDON.
Founded A.D. 1842.

  _Directors._

      H. Edgeworth Bicknell, Esq.
      William Cabell, Esq.
      T. Somers Cocks, Jun. Esq. M.P.
      G. Henry Drew, Esq.
      William Evans, Esq.
      William Freeman, Esq.
      F. Fuller, Esq.
      J. Henry Goodhart, Esq.
      T. Grissell, Esq.
      James Hunt, Esq.
      J. Arscott Lethbridge, Esq.
      E. Lucas, Esq.
      James Lys Seager, Esq.
      J. Basley White, Esq.
      Joseph Carter Wood, Esq.

  _Trustees._

      W. Whateley, Esq., Q.C.
      L. C. Humfrey, Esq., Q.C.
      George Drew, Esq.

      _Consulting Counsel._--Sir Wm. P. Wood, M.P., Solicitor-General.
      _Physician._--William Rich. Basham, M.D.
      _Bankers._--Messrs. Cocks, Biddulph, and Co., Charing Cross.

  VALUABLE PRIVILEGE.

  POLICIES effected in this Office do not become void through
  temporary difficulty in paying a Premium, as permission is given
  upon application to suspend the payment of interest, according to
  the conditions detailed in the Prospectus.

  Specimens of Rates of Premiums for Assuring 100_l._, with a Share
  in three-fourths of the Profits:--

      Age               _£_ _s._ _d._
       17               1    14    4
       22               1    18    8
       27               2     4    5
       32               2    10    8
       37               2    18    6
       42               3     8    2

  ARTHUR SCRATCHLEY, M.A., F.R.A.S., Actuary.

  Now ready, price 10_s._ 6_d._, Second Edition, with material
  additions, INDUSTRIAL INVESTMENT and EMIGRATION; being a TREATISE
  on BENEFIT BUILDING SOCIETIES, and on the General Principles of
  Land Investment, exemplified in the Cases of Freehold Land
  Societies, Building Companies, &c., With a Mathematical Appendix
  on Compound Interest and Life Assurance. By ARTHUR SCRATCHLEY,
  M.A., Actuary to the Western Life Assurance Society, 3. Parliament
  Street, London.


Price Fourpence of any Bookseller,

    PERMANENTLY ENLARGED TO TWENTY-FOUR LARGE QUARTO PAGES.

  THE ANTHENÆUM

    JOURNAL OF LITERATURE, SCIENCE, AND ART;
    (Stamped to go free by post, 5d.) CONTAINS:--

  +Reviews+, with copious extracts, of every important New English
  Book, and of the more important Foreign Works.

  +Reports+ of the Proceedings of the Learned and Scientific
  Societies, with Abstracts of all Papers of Interest.

  +Authentic Accounts+ of all Scientific Voyages and Expeditions.

  +Criticisms on Art+, with Critical Notices of Exhibitions, Picture
  Collections, New Prints, &c.

  +Music and Drama+, including Reports on the Opera, Concerts,
  Theatres, New Music, &c.

  +Biographical Notices+ of Men distinguished in Literature,
  Science, and Art.

  +Original Papers and Poems+.

  +Miscellanea+, including all that is likely to interest the
  informed and intelligent.

  THE ATHENÆUM

  is so conducted that the reader, however far distant, is, in
  respect to Literature, Science, and the Arts, on an equality in
  point of information, with the best-informed circles of the
  Metropolis.

    [Star symbol] The ATHENÆum is published every SATURDAY, but is
    re-issued each Month stitched in a wrapper.

  Wholesale Agents: for SCOTLAND, Messrs. Bell & Bradfute,
  Edinburgh; for IRELAND, Mr. John Robertson, Dublin; for FRANCE, M.
  Baudry, 3. Quai Malaquais, Paris.


STATE PAPERS AND AUTOGRAPHS. PUTTICK AND SIMPSON,

  Auctioneers of Literary Property, will SELL by AUCTION, at their
  Great Room, 191. Piccadilly, on TUESDAY, January 20th, an
  important assemblage of State Papers and Documents, enriched with
  numerous Royal and other Autographs: many of them relating to
  interesting and memorable periods, persons, and incidents in
  British History during the last three centuries. Catalogues will
  be sent on application (if in the country, on receipt of six
  stamps).


Eleventh annual Edition, price 1_s._ sewed.

  THE LONDON CATALOGUE OF PERIODICALS, NEWSPAPERS, &c. &c., for
  1852, contains a List of Metropolitan Printing and Publishing
  Societies and Clubs, with the Annual Subscription, and Secretaries
  names and addresses; also the Transactions of Literary and
  Scientific Societies, specifying the last part published and
  price.

  LONGMAN, BROWN, GREEN, & LONGMANS.


Preparing for publication, in Numbers at 3_s._ each (to Subscribers
2_s._ 6_d._).

  REMAINS OF PAGAN SAXONDOM, principally from Tumuli in England.
  Drawn from the Originals. Described and illustrated by JOHN YONGE
  AKERMAN, Fellow and Secretary of the Society of Antiquaries of
  London. The Engravings or Lithographs will, if possible, in every
  case, be of the actual size of the objects represented. The First
  Number will appear as soon as the names of Two Hundred Subscribers
  have been received.

  Subscribers are requested to forward their Names to the care of

  MR. JOHN RUSSELL SMITH, 36. Soho Square, London.


Published this day, fcap. 8vo. ornamental binding, 7_s._ 6_d._

  NORICA; or, TALES OF NURNBERG. FROM THE OLDEN TIME. Translated
  from the German of AUGUST HAGEN.

  "This pleasant volume is got up in that style of imitation of the
  books of a century ago, which has of late become so much the
  vogue. The typographical and mechanical departments of the volume
  speak loudly for the taste and enterprise employed upon it. Simple
  in its style, quaint, pithy, reasonably pungent--the book smacks
  strongly of the picturesque old days of which it
  treats."--_Atlas._

  London: JOHN CHAPMAN, 142. Strand.


In 8vo., price 1_s._,

  PRACTICAL REMARKS on BELFRIES and RINGERS. By the Rev. HENRY T.
  ELLACOMBE, M.A., of Oriel College, Oxford, Rector of Clyst St.
  George, Devon.

  London: GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street.

  Bristol: JOHN RIDLER.


8vo., boards, price 5_s._,

  RESEARCHES on CURVES of the SECOND ORDER: also on Cones and
  Spherical Conics, treated analytically, in which the tangencies of
  Apollonius are investigated, and general geometrical constructions
  deduced from analysis; also several of the Geometrical Conclusions
  of M. Chasles are analytically resolved, together with many
  properties entirely original. By the late GEORGE WHITEHEAD HEARN,
  a Graduate of Cambridge, and a Professor of Mathematics in the
  Royal Military College, Sandhurst.

  "Most ingenious and elegant."--_Gaskin's Problems._

  GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street.


Just published, price 6_d._, by post 8_d._

  THE PLANTING OF NATIONS A GREAT RESPONSIBILITY.

  A Sermon preached at the Church of St. Mary the Virgin, in Oxford,
  on the occasion of the Third Jubilee of the Society for the
  Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts. By SAMUEL, LORD BISHOP
  OF OXFORD, Lord High Almoner to the Queen, and Chancellor of the
  Most Noble Order of the Garter. Published by Request.

  London: GEORGE BELL, 186. Fleet Street.


THE BEST is the CHEAPEST.

      The Best Congou Tea                 3_s._ 8_d._ per lb.
      The Best Souchong Tea               4_s._ 4_d._   "
      The Best Gunpowder Tea              5_s._ 8_d._   "
      The Best Old Mocha Coffee           1_s._ 4_d._   "
      The Best West India Coffee          1_s._ 4_d._   "
      The Fine True Ripe Rich
        Rare Souchong Tea                 4_s._ 0_d._   "

  40_s._ worth or upwards sent CARRIAGE FREE to any part of England by

  PHILLIPS CO., TEA MERCHANTS, No. 8. King William Street, City, London.


LONDON LIBRARY, 12. St. James's Square.

  Patron: His Royal Highness Prince ALBERT.

  This Institution now offers to its members a collection of 60,000
  volumes, to which additions are constantly making, both in English
  and foreign literature. A reading room is also open for the use of
  the members, supplied with the best English and foreign
  periodicals.

  Terms of admission--entrance fee, 6_l._; annual subscription,
  2_l._; or entrance fee and life subscription, 26_l._

  By order of the Committee.

  J. G. COCHRANE, Secretary and Librarian September, 1851.


BOOKS PUBLISHED BY

      JOHN RUSSELL SMITH,
      4. OLD COMPTON STREET, SOHO SQUARE, LONDON.


GUIDE TO ARCHÆOLOGY. An Archæological Index to Remains of Antiquity of
the Celtic, Romano-British, and Anglo-Saxon periods. By JOHN YONGE
AKERMAN, fellow and secretary to the Society of Antiquaries. 1 vol. 8vo.
illustrated with numerous engravings, comprising upwards of 500 objects,
cloth, 15_s._

    "One of the first wants of an incipient antiquary is the facility
    of comparison, and here it is furnished him at one glance. The
    plates, indeed, form the most valuable part of the book, both by
    their number and the judicious selection of types and examples
    which they contain. It is a book which we can, on this account,
    safely and warmly recommend to all who are interested in the
    antiquities of their native land."--_Literary Gazette._

    "A book of such utility--so concise, so clear, so well condensed from
    such varied and voluminous sources--cannot fail to be generally
    acceptable."--_Art Union._


COINS. An Introduction to the Study of Ancient and Modern Coins. By J.
Y. AKERMAN. Fcp. 8vo. with numerous wood engravings, from the original
coins, 6_s._ 6_d._


COINS OF THE ROMANS RELATING TO BRITAIN, described and illustrated. By
J. Y. AKERMAN, F.S.A. Second edition, 8vo. greatly enlarged with plates
and woodcuts, 10_s._ 6_d._ cloth.


BIOGRAPHIA BRITANNICA LITERARIA; or Biography of Literary Characters of
Great Britain and Ireland, arranged in Chronological Order. By THOMAS
WRIGHT, M.A., F.S.A., Member of the Institute of France. 2 thick vols.
8vo. cloth. Vol. I. Anglo-Saxon Period. Vol. II. Anglo-Norman Period.
6_s._ each, published at 12_s._ each.

  Published under the superintendence of the Royal Society of
  Literature.


WRIGHT'S (THOS.) ESSAYS ON THE LITERATURE, POPULAR SUPERSTITIONS, AND
HISTORY OF ENGLAND in the MIDDLE AGES. 2 vols. post 8vo. cloth, 16_s._


WRIGHT'S (THOS.) ST. PATRICK'S PURGATORY; an Essay on the Legends of
Purgatory, Hell, and Paradise, current during the Middle Ages. Post 8vo.
cloth, 6_s._


LOWER'S (M. A.) ESSAYS ON ENGLISH SURNAMES. 2 vols. post 8vo. Third
Edition, greatly enlarged, cloth, 12_s._


LOWER'S CURIOSITIES OF HERALDRY, with Illustrations from Old English
Writers. 8vo. Numerous Engravings. Cloth, 14_s._


HERALDS' VISITATIONS. An Index to all the Pedigrees and Arms in the
Heraldic Visitations and other Genealogical MSS. in the British Museum.
By G. SIMS, of the Manuscript Department. 8vo. closely printed in double
columns, cloth, 15_s._

  [Star symbol] An indispensable book to those engaged in
  genealogical or topographical pursuits, affording a ready clue to
  the pedigrees and arms of above 30,000 of the gentry of England,
  their residences, &c., (distinguishing the different families of
  the same name in every county), as recorded by the Heralds in
  their Visitations, with Indexes to other genealogical MSS. in the
  British Museum. It has been the work of immense labour. No public
  library ought to be without it.


THE NURSERY RHYMES OF ENGLAND, collected chiefly from oral tradition.
Edited by J. O. HALLIWELL. Fourth edition, 12mo. with 38 Designs by W.
B. Scott. 4_s._ 6_d._ cloth.


POPULAR RHYMES AND NURSERY TALES, with Historical Elucidations: a Sequel
to "The Nursery Rhymes of England." Edited by J. O. HALLIWELL. Royal
18mo. 4_s._ 6_d._


HOLBEIN'S DANCE OF DEATH, with an Historical and Literary Introduction
by an Antiquary. Square post 8vo. with 51 Engravings, being the most
accurate copies ever executed of these gems of Art, and a Frontispiece
of an Ancient Bedstead at Aix-la-Chapelle, with a Dance of Death carved
on it, engraved by Fairholt, cloth, 9_s._

  "The designs are executed with a spirit and fidelity quite
  extraordinary. They are indeed most truthful."--_Athenæum._


FACTS AND SPECULATIONS ON THE ORIGIN AND HISTORY OF PLAYING CARDS. By W.
A. CHATTO, Author of "Jackson's History of Wood Engraving," in one
handsome vol. 8vo. illustrated with many Engravings, both plain and
coloured, cloth, 1_l._ 1_s._

  "It is exceedingly amusing."--_Atlas._

  "Curious, entertaining, and really learned book."--_Rambler._

  "Indeed the entire production deserves our warmest
  approbation."--_Literary Gazette._

  "A perfect fund of Antiquarian research, and most interesting even
  to persons who never play at cards."--_Tait's Mag._


A DICTIONARY OF ARCHAIC AND PROVINCIAL WORDS, Obsolete Phrases,
Proverbs, and Ancient Customs, from the reign of Edward I. By JAMES
ORCHARD HALLIWELL, F.R.S., F.S.A., &c., 2 vols. 8vo. containing upwards
of 1,000 pages, closely printed in double columns, cloth. 1_l._ 1_s._

  It contains about 50,000 Words (embodying all the known scattered
  Glossaries of the English language), forming a complete key to the
  reading of the works of our old Poets, Dramatists, Theologians,
  and other authors, whose works abound with allusions, of which
  explanations are not to be found in ordinary Dictionaries and
  books of reference. Most of the principal Archaisms are
  illustrated by examples selected from early inedited MSS. and rare
  books, and by far the greater portion will be found to be original
  authorities.


A DELECTUS IN ANGLO-SAXON. intended as a first Class-book in the
Language. By the Rev. W. BARNES. of St. John's College, Cambridge,
author of the Poems and Glossary in the Dorset dialect. 12mo. cloth,
2_s._ 6_d._

  "To those who wish to possess a critical knowledge of their own
  native English, some acquaintance with Anglo-Saxon is
  indispensable; and we have never seen an introduction better
  calculated than the present to supply the want of a beginner in a
  short space of time. The declensions and conjugations are well
  stated, and illustrated by references to the Greek, Latin, French,
  and other languages. A philosophical spirit pervades every part.
  The Delectus consists of short pieces on various subjects, with
  extracts from Anglo-Saxon History and the Saxon Chronicle. There
  is a good Glossary at the end."--_Athenæum, Oct. 20, 1819._


GUIDE TO THE ANGLO-SAXON TONGUE, with Lessons in Verse and Prose, for
the Use of Learners. By E. J. VERNON, B.A., Oxon. 12mo. cloth, 5_s._
6_d._

  This will be found useful as a Second Class-book, or to those well
  versed in other languages.


BOSWORTH'S (REV. DR.) COMPENDIOUS ANGLO-SAXON AND ENGLISH DICTIONARY.
8vo. closely printed in treble columns, cloth, 12_s._

  "This is not a mere abridgment of the large Dictionary, but almost
  an entirely new work. In this compendious one will be found, at a
  very moderate price, all that is most practical and valuable in
  the former expensive edition, with a great accession of new words
  and matter."--_Author's Preface._


ANALECTA ANGLO-SAXONICA. Selections in Prose and Verse from Anglo-Saxon
Literature, with an Introductory Ethnological Essay, and Notes, critical
and explanatory. By LOUIS F. KLIPSTEIN, of the University of Giessen, 2
thick vols. post 8vo. cloth. 12_s._ (original price 18_s._)


A LITTLE BOOK OF SONGS AND BALLADS, gathered from Ancient Musick Books,
MS. and Printed. By E. F. RIMBAULT, LL.D., &c. Post 8vo. pp. 240,
half-bound in morocco, 6_s._

        ----Antique Ballads, sung to crowds of old,
      Now cheaply bought for thrice their weight in gold.


BIBLIOTHECA MADRIGALIANA; a Bibliographical Account of the Music and
Poetical Works published in England in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth
Centuries, under the Titles of Madrigals, Ballets, Ayres, Canzonets, &c.
By DR. RIMBAULT. 8vo. cloth, 5_s._


CONSUETUDINES KANCIÆ. A History of GAVELKIND, and other remarkable
Customs in the County of KENT, by CHARLES SANDYS, Esq., F.S.A.
(Cantianus), illustrated with fac-similes, a very handsome volume, 8vo.
cloth, 15_s._


BRUCE'S (REV. J. C.) HISTORICAL AND TOPOGRAPHICAL ACCOUNT OF THE ROMAN
WALL FROM THE TYNE TO THE SOLWAY. Thick 8vo. 35 plates and 194 woodcuts,
half morocco, 1_l._ 1_s._




Printed by THOMAS CLARK SHAW, of No. 8. New Street Square, at No. 5. New
Street Square, in the Parish of St. Bride, in the City of London; and
published by GEORGE BELL, of No. 186. Fleet Street, in the Parish of St.
Dunstan in the West, in the City of London, Publisher, at No. 186. Fleet
Street aforesaid.--Saturday, January 17., 1852.




[Transcriber's Note: List of volumes and content pages in "Notes and
Queries", Vol. I.-V.]

      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. I.                                   |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol., No.     | Date, Year        | Pages     | PG # xxxxx  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No.  1 | November  3, 1849 |   1 -  17 | PG #  8603  |
      | Vol. I No.  2 | November 10, 1849 |  18 -  32 | PG # 11265  |
      | Vol. I No.  3 | November 17, 1849 |  33 -  46 | PG # 11577  |
      | Vol. I No.  4 | November 24, 1849 |  49 -  63 | PG # 13513  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No.  5 | December  1, 1849 |  65 -  80 | PG # 11636  |
      | Vol. I No.  6 | December  8, 1849 |  81 -  95 | PG # 13550  |
      | Vol. I No.  7 | December 15, 1849 |  97 - 112 | PG # 11651  |
      | Vol. I No.  8 | December 22, 1849 | 113 - 128 | PG # 11652  |
      | Vol. I No.  9 | December 29, 1849 | 130 - 144 | PG # 13521  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 10 | January   5, 1850 | 145 - 160 | PG #        |
      | Vol. I No. 11 | January  12, 1850 | 161 - 176 | PG # 11653  |
      | Vol. I No. 12 | January  19, 1850 | 177 - 192 | PG # 11575  |
      | Vol. I No. 13 | January  26, 1850 | 193 - 208 | PG # 11707  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 14 | February  2, 1850 | 209 - 224 | PG # 13558  |
      | Vol. I No. 15 | February  9, 1850 | 225 - 238 | PG # 11929  |
      | Vol. I No. 16 | February 16, 1850 | 241 - 256 | PG # 16193  |
      | Vol. I No. 17 | February 23, 1850 | 257 - 271 | PG # 12018  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 18 | March     2, 1850 | 273 - 288 | PG # 13544  |
      | Vol. I No. 19 | March     9, 1850 | 289 - 309 | PG # 13638  |
      | Vol. I No. 20 | March    16, 1850 | 313 - 328 | PG # 16409  |
      | Vol. I No. 21 | March    23, 1850 | 329 - 343 | PG # 11958  |
      | Vol. I No. 22 | March    30, 1850 | 345 - 359 | PG # 12198  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 23 | April     6, 1850 | 361 - 376 | PG # 12505  |
      | Vol. I No. 24 | April    13, 1850 | 377 - 392 | PG # 13925  |
      | Vol. I No. 25 | April    20, 1850 | 393 - 408 | PG # 13747  |
      | Vol. I No. 26 | April    27, 1850 | 409 - 423 | PG # 13822  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Vol. I No. 27 | May       4, 1850 | 425 - 447 | PG # 13712  |
      | Vol. I No. 28 | May      11, 1850 | 449 - 463 | PG # 13684  |
      | Vol. I No. 29 | May      18, 1850 | 465 - 479 | PG # 15197  |
      | Vol. I No. 30 | May      25, 1850 | 481 - 495 | PG # 13713  |
      +---------------+-------------------+-----------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. II.                                  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol., No.      | Date, Year         | Pages   | PG # xxxxx  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 31 | June  1, 1850      |   1- 15 | PG # 12589  |
      | Vol. II No. 32 | June  8, 1850      |  17- 32 | PG # 15996  |
      | Vol. II No. 33 | June 15, 1850      |  33- 48 | PG # 26121  |
      | Vol. II No. 34 | June 22, 1850      |  49- 64 | PG # 22127  |
      | Vol. II No. 35 | June 29, 1850      |  65- 79 | PG # 22126  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 36 | July  6, 1850      |  81- 96 | PG # 13361  |
      | Vol. II No. 37 | July 13, 1850      |  97-112 | PG # 13729  |
      | Vol. II No. 38 | July 20, 1850      | 113-128 | PG # 13362  |
      | Vol. II No. 39 | July 27, 1850      | 129-143 | PG # 13736  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 40 | August  3, 1850    | 145-159 | PG # 13389  |
      | Vol. II No. 41 | August 10, 1850    | 161-176 | PG # 13393  |
      | Vol. II No. 42 | August 17, 1850    | 177-191 | PG # 13411  |
      | Vol. II No. 43 | August 24, 1850    | 193-207 | PG # 13406  |
      | Vol. II No. 44 | August 31, 1850    | 209-223 | PG # 13426  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 45 | September  7, 1850 | 225-240 | PG # 13427  |
      | Vol. II No. 46 | September 14, 1850 | 241-256 | PG # 13462  |
      | Vol. II No. 47 | September 21, 1850 | 257-272 | PG # 13936  |
      | Vol. II No. 48 | September 28, 1850 | 273-288 | PG # 13463  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 49 | October  5, 1850   | 289-304 | PG # 13480  |
      | Vol. II No. 50 | October 12, 1850   | 305-320 | PG # 13551  |
      | Vol. II No. 51 | October 19, 1850   | 321-351 | PG # 15232  |
      | Vol. II No. 52 | October 26, 1850   | 353-367 | PG # 22624  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 53 | November  2, 1850  | 369-383 | PG # 13540  |
      | Vol. II No. 54 | November  9, 1850  | 385-399 | PG # 22138  |
      | Vol. II No. 55 | November 16, 1850  | 401-415 | PG # 15216  |
      | Vol. II No. 56 | November 23, 1850  | 417-431 | PG # 15354  |
      | Vol. II No. 57 | November 30, 1850  | 433-454 | PG # 15405  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. II No. 58 | December  7, 1850  | 457-470 | PG # 21503  |
      | Vol. II No. 59 | December 14, 1850  | 473-486 | PG # 15427  |
      | Vol. II No. 60 | December 21, 1850  | 489-502 | PG # 24803  |
      | Vol. II No. 61 | December 28, 1850  | 505-524 | PG # 16404  |
      +----------------+--------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. III.                                 |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol., No.       | Date, Year        | Pages   | PG # xxxxx  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 62 | January  4, 1851  |   1- 15 | PG # 15638  |
      | Vol. III No. 63 | January 11, 1851  |  17- 31 | PG # 15639  |
      | Vol. III No. 64 | January 18, 1851  |  33- 47 | PG # 15640  |
      | Vol. III No. 65 | January 25, 1851  |  49- 78 | PG # 15641  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 66 | February  1, 1851 |  81- 95 | PG # 22339  |
      | Vol. III No. 67 | February  8, 1851 |  97-111 | PG # 22625  |
      | Vol. III No. 68 | February 15, 1851 | 113-127 | PG # 22639  |
      | Vol. III No. 69 | February 22, 1851 | 129-159 | PG # 23027  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 70 | March  1, 1851    | 161-174 | PG # 23204  |
      | Vol. III No. 71 | March  8, 1851    | 177-200 | PG # 23205  |
      | Vol. III No. 72 | March 15, 1851    | 201-215 | PG # 23212  |
      | Vol. III No. 73 | March 22, 1851    | 217-231 | PG # 23225  |
      | Vol. III No. 74 | March 29, 1851    | 233-255 | PG # 23282  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 75 | April  5, 1851    | 257-271 | PG # 23402  |
      | Vol. III No. 76 | April 12, 1851    | 273-294 | PG # 26896  |
      | Vol. III No. 77 | April 19, 1851    | 297-311 | PG # 26897  |
      | Vol. III No. 78 | April 26, 1851    | 313-342 | PG # 26898  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 79 | May  3, 1851      | 345-359 | PG # 26899  |
      | Vol. III No. 80 | May 10, 1851      | 361-382 | PG # 32495  |
      | Vol. III No. 81 | May 17, 1851      | 385-399 | PG # 29318  |
      | Vol. III No. 82 | May 24, 1851      | 401-415 | PG # 28311  |
      | Vol. III No. 83 | May 31, 1851      | 417-440 | PG # 36835  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Vol. III No. 84 | June  7, 1851     | 441-472 | PG # 37379  |
      | Vol. III No. 85 | June 14, 1851     | 473-488 | PG # 37403  |
      | Vol. III No. 86 | June 21, 1851     | 489-511 | PG # 37496  |
      | Vol. III No. 87 | June 28, 1851     | 513-528 | PG # 37516  |
      +-----------------+-------------------+---------+-------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. IV.                                  |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol., No.       | Date, Year         | Pages   | PG # xxxxx |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No.  88 | July  5, 1851      |   1- 15 | PG # 37548 |
      | Vol. IV No.  89 | July 12, 1851      |  17- 31 | PG # 37568 |
      | Vol. IV No.  90 | July 19, 1851      |  33- 47 | PG # 37593 |
      | Vol. IV No.  91 | July 26, 1851      |  49- 79 | PG # 37778 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No.  92 | August  2, 1851    |  81- 94 | PG # 38324 |
      | Vol. IV No.  93 | August  9, 1851    |  97-112 | PG # 38337 |
      | Vol. IV No.  94 | August 16, 1851    | 113-127 | PG # 38350 |
      | Vol. IV No.  95 | August 23, 1851    | 129-144 | PG # 38386 |
      | Vol. IV No.  96 | August 30, 1851    | 145-167 | PG # 38405 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No.  97 | Sept.  6, 1851     | 169-183 | PG # 38433 |
      | Vol. IV No.  98 | Sept. 13, 1851     | 185-200 | PG # 38491 |
      | Vol. IV No.  99 | Sept. 20, 1851     | 201-216 | PG # 38574 |
      | Vol. IV No. 100 | Sept. 27, 1851     | 217-246 | PG # 38656 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No. 101 | Oct.  4, 1851      | 249-264 | PG # 38701 |
      | Vol. IV No. 102 | Oct. 11, 1851      | 265-287 | PG # 38773 |
      | Vol. IV No. 103 | Oct. 18, 1851      | 289-303 | PG # 38864 |
      | Vol. IV No. 104 | Oct. 25, 1851      | 305-333 | PG # 38926 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No. 105 | Nov.  1, 1851      | 337-358 | PG # 39076 |
      | Vol. IV No. 106 | Nov.  8, 1851      | 361-374 | PG # 39091 |
      | Vol. IV No. 107 | Nov. 15, 1851      | 377-396 | PG # 39135 |
      | Vol. IV No. 108 | Nov. 22, 1851      | 401-414 | PG # 39197 |
      | Vol. IV No. 109 | Nov. 29, 1851      | 417-430 | PG # 39233 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. IV No. 110 | Dec.  6, 1851      | 433-460 | PG # 39338 |
      | Vol. IV No. 111 | Dec. 13, 1851      | 465-478 | PG # 39393 |
      | Vol. IV No. 112 | Dec. 20, 1851      | 481-494 | PG # 39438 |
      | Vol. IV No. 113 | Dec. 27, 1851      | 497-510 | PG # 39503 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Notes and Queries Vol. V.                                   |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol., No.       | Date, Year         |  Pages  | PG # xxxxx |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol. V  No. 114 | January  3, 1852   |   1-18  | PG # 40171 |
      | Vol. V  No. 115 | January 10, 1852   |  25-45  | PG # 40582 |
      +-----------------+--------------------+---------+------------+
      | Vol I. Index. [Nov. 1849-May 1850]             | PG # 13536 |
      | INDEX TO THE SECOND VOLUME. MAY-DEC., 1850     | PG # 13571 |
      | INDEX TO THE THIRD VOLUME. JAN.-JUNE, 1851     | PG # 26770 |
      | INDEX TO THE FOURTH VOLUME. JULY-DEC., 1851    | PG # 40166 |
      +------------------------------------------------+------------+





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes and Queries, Vol. V, Number 116,
January 17, 1852, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES AND QUERIES, JAN 17, 1852 ***

***** This file should be named 40642-0.txt or 40642-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/0/6/4/40642/

Produced by Charlene Taylor, Jonathan Ingram and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Library of Early Journals.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
