The Project Gutenberg EBook of Tom Slade on the River, by Percy K. Fitzhugh

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Tom Slade on the River

Author: Percy K. Fitzhugh

Illustrator: Walter S. Rogers

Release Date: February 22, 2013 [EBook #42155]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TOM SLADE ON THE RIVER ***




Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, Brenda Lewis and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Print project.)









                               TOM SLADE
                              ON THE RIVER


                                   BY
                           PERCY K. FITZHUGH


                               Author of
             “TOM SLADE, BOY SCOUT OF THE MOVING PICTURES,”
                    “TOM SLADE AT TEMPLE CAMP” ETC.


                             ILLUSTRATED BY
                            WALTER S. ROGERS


                     PUBLISHED WITH THE APPROVAL OF
                       THE BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA


                            GROSSET & DUNLAP
                         PUBLISHERS :: NEW YORK


                  Made in the United States of America
                          Copyright, 1917, by
                            GROSSET & DUNLAP




                           TABLE OF CONTENTS


  CHAPTER                                                           PAGE
  I. The First Arrival                                                 1
  II. Tom Surprises the Camp                                          17
  III. Roy’s Campfire Yarn                                            25
  IV. The Old Trail                                                   42
  V. Adventure of the Rescue Party                                    53
  VI. The Mountain Shelter                                            63
  VII. “Under Which King?”                                            80
  VIII. Jeffrey Waring                                                87
  IX. A New Kind of First Aid                                        107
  X. The Birthday of the Elk Patrol                                  113
  XI. Garry’s Story and Harry Stanton’s                              127
  XII. Pee-wee Triumphant                                            138
  XIII. At the Stanton’s                                             148
  XIV. First Bridgeboro B.S.A. Becomes a Full Troop                  164
  XV. Cruising in the “Honor Scout”                                  170
  XVI. The Invisible Badge                                           180
  XVII. Lost!                                                        192
  XVIII. The Tragic Adventure of the Freckled Scout                  201
  XIX. “So Long—See You Later!”                                      222




                               TOM SLADE
                              ON THE RIVER




                               CHAPTER I
                           THE FIRST ARRIVAL


“But suppose they shouldn’t come.”

“Son, when I wuz out in Colorady, in a place we called Devil’s Pass, I
gut a grizzly backed up agin’ a ledge one day ’n’ heving ony one bullet
’twas a case uv me or him, as yer might say. My pardner, Simon Gurthy,
who likewise didn’t hev no bullets, ’count uv bein’ stripped b’ the
Injins, he says, ‘S’posin’ ye don’t fetch him.’ ’N’ I says, ‘S’posin’ I
do.’”

Jeb Rushmore, with methodical accuracy, spat at a sapling near by.

“And did you?” asked his listener.

Jeb spat again with leisurely deliberation. “’N’ I did,” said he.

“You always hit, don’t you, Jeb?”

“Purty near.”

The boy edged along the log on which they were sitting and looked up
admiringly into the wrinkled, weatherbeaten face. A smile which did not
altogether penetrate through the drooping gray mustache was visible
enough in the twinkling eyes and drew the wrinkles about them like sun
rays.

“They’ll come,” said he.

The boy was satisfied for he had absolute confidence that his companion
could not make a mistake.

“But suppose you _hadn’t_ hit him—I mean fetched him?”

“Son, wot yer _got_ to do, yer do. When I told General Custer onct that
we’d get picked off like cherries offen a tree if we tried rushin’ a pack
uv Sioux that was in ambush, he says, ‘Jeb, mebbe it cain’t be done, I
ain’t sayin’, but jest the same, we _got_ ter do it.’ Some on us got
dropped, but we done it.”

“Did General Custer call you by your first name?”

“Same’s you do.”

This was too much for the little fellow. “Gee, it must have been great to
have General Custer call you by your first name.”

“Wal, now, I ben thinkin’ ’twas purty fine this winter hevin’ _yew_ call
me by my fust name, ’n’ keep me comp’ny here. We’ve got ter be close
pards, me an’ you, hain’t we, son?”

“Gee, I’m almost sorry they’re coming—kind of.”

They were certainly coming—“in chunks,” as Roy Blakeley would have said,
and before night the camp would be a veritable beehive. All summer troops
would be coming and going, but just now the opening rush was at hand, and
the exodus from eastern towns and cities, following the closing of
schools, would go far to fill the camp even to its generous capacity
before this Saturday’s sun had set.

The Bridgeboro Troop, from the home town of the camp’s generous founder,
Mr. John Temple, would arrive sometime in the afternoon “with bells on”
according to the post card which little Raymond Hollister had brought up
from the post office the day before.

They were cruising up the Hudson to Catskill Landing in their cabin
launch, the _Good Turn_, and would hike it up through Leeds to camp. The
card was postmarked Poughkeepsie, and read:

                                          Desert Island of Poughkeepsie,
                                           Longitude 23, Latitude 40-11.

  “Put in here for gasoline and ice-cream soda. Natives friendly. Heavy
  gales. Raining in sheets and pillow-cases. Mutiny on board. Pee-wee
  Harris, N. G. Mariner, put in irons for stealing peanuts from galley.
  Boarded by pirates below Peekskill. Coming north with bells on. Reach
  camp Saturday late. All’s well with a yo-heave-ho, my lads.”

“That sounds like Roy Blakeley,” Raymond had said to his companion.

“Does sound kinder like his nonsense,” the camp manager had answered.

All through the long winter months Raymond had lived at the big camp with
no other companion than Jeb Rushmore. They had made their headquarters in
Jeb’s cabin, the other cabins and the big pavilion being shut tight.
Raymond had often thought how like the pictures of Valley Forge this
vacant clearing in the woods looked in its covering of snow, and
sometimes when Jeb was busy writing letters (it was a terrible job for
Jeb to write letters) the little fellow had been lonesome, but he had
gained in weight, he had slept like a bear, he had ceased entirely to
cough, and he ate—there is no way to describe how he ate!

In short, a great fight had been fought out in the lonely camp that
winter, and little Raymond Hollister had won it. He could trudge into the
village and back without minding it now and he could raise the big flag
with one hand. Just the coming summer to top off with and he would be
well.

Raymond lived down the Hudson a ways and he had come to Temple Camp with
his troop the previous summer. His patrol leader, Garry Everson, had won
the Silver Cross, which, according to the rule of the Camp, entitled him
and his companions to remain three extra weeks, and when Mr. John Temple
had heard of Raymond’s ill health from the Bridgeboro boys on their
return from camp, he had called his stenographer and sent a couple of
home-runs over the plate in the form of two letters, one to Raymond’s
grandmother telling her that she had guessed wrong when she had “guessed
that Ray would have to go to an orphan asylum when he came back,” and the
other enclosing a check to Jeb Rushmore and telling him that Raymond
would stay with him for the winter and to please see to it that he had
everything he needed.

That was in the previous autumn. Jeb had gotten out his bespattered,
pyramid-shaped ink bottle and his atrocious pen and laboriously scrawled
his signature on the back of the check and had it cashed in Leeds. He had
kept the little roll of bills carefully in his pocket all winter, buying
such things for Raymond as were needed, and as the roll grew thinner
Raymond had grown stouter, until now, in the spring, he weighed
ninety-one pounds and the roll was all gone except the elastic band.

It seemed a pity that just at the opening of the new season he should
have to think of going home and perhaps to an orphan asylum, but if he
had entertained any wild hope that some fortunate circumstance might
prolong his stay into the open season it had been dissipated when word
had come that the Temples had gone to South America. Either John Temple
had forgotten about the boy up in the lonely camp or else he felt that he
had done as much for him as could be expected. Raymond might still remain
for two weeks of the new season as any scout might do, but then he would
be at the end of his rope. For the rule of Temple Camp was that any scout
or troop of scouts might spend two weeks at the camp free of all cost. If
a scout won an honor medal it entitled his whole troop to additional
time, the time dependent on the nature of the award. No scout might
remain at camp longer than two weeks except in accordance with this
provision, but permission might be granted on the recommendation of one
of the trustees for a scout to _board_ at camp for a longer time if there
were good reason.

One day, however, a registered letter had come for Jeb. It contained
fifty dollars and a slip of paper bearing only the words: _For Raymond
Hollister to stay until September first_.

“So he remembered ’baout yer arter all,” Jeb had said, as pleased as
Raymond himself. “I kinder knowed he would. If _he_ ain’t a trusty (Jeb
always said _trusty_ when he meant _trustee_) ’n’ got rights, gol, I
dunno who has. They wuz jest goin’ on th’boat, I reckon, when it popped
inter his head like a dose uv buckshot ’n’ he sent it right from
th’wharf.——’ N’ I dun’t hev ter get out my ink bottle ’n’ my old
double-barrelled pen ter _in_dorse, neither.”

There they were—two twenties and a ten; to Raymond they seemed like a
fortune as he watched Jeb fold them up and slip them into his home-made
buckskin wallet.

All this had happened before this auspicious Saturday, but the dispelling
of Raymond’s fears had given rise to new apprehensions.

“Even if they come,” said he, “maybe Garry won’t be with them—maybe they
won’t stop for him.” Garry Everson was all that was left of the little
troop he had striven to keep together the previous summer and the
Bridgeboro troop had promised to stop for him and bring him along.

“An’ then agin, mebbe they will,” laughed Jeb.

“Who do you think will be the first to get here, Jeb?”

“Mebbe them lads from South New Jersey, mebbe the Pennsylvany
youngsters,” said Jeb, consulting his list from the home-made buckskin
wallet. The trustees kept these lists in the neatest and most approved
manner, but Jeb had a system of record keeping all his own. “Let’s see,
naouw, thar’s thet troop with the red-headed boy from Merryland—’member
’em, don’t ye? They’ll be comin’ all week, more’n like. Seems ony like
yist’day, thet that ole hill over thar wuz covered with snow—’member how
me an’ you watched it? We had a rough winter of it, didn’t we. Here,
lemme feel yer muscle agin now. Gee-williger! Gittin’ ter be a reg’lar
Samson, ain’t ye?”

“Now that it’s time for them to come,” said Raymond, slowly, “I’m almost
sorry—kind of. It was dandy being alone here with you.”

Jeb slapped him on the shoulder and smiled again that smile that drew the
wrinkles like sun rays around his twinkling eyes, and went about his work
of preparation. Perhaps he, too, rough old scout that he was, felt that
it had been “dandy” having little Raymond alone with him through those
long, cold winter months.

All day long Raymond kept his gaze across Black Lake, for he knew that
the Bridgeboro boys, hiking it from the Hudson, would come that way; but
the hours of the afternoon passed and there were no arrivals. The hills
surrounding the camp began to darken in the twilight, save for the
crimson tinge upon their summits from the dying sun; the dark waters of
the lake grew more sombre in the twilight and the still solemnity of
evening, which was nowhere more gloomy and impressive than at this
lakeside camp in the hills, fell upon the scene and cast its spell upon
the lonely boy as it always did. But no one came.

Jeb Rushmore strolled down to where Raymond sat on the rough bench
outside the provision cabin, facing the lake.

“Still watchin’? If yew say so, I’ll light a lantern and we’ll tow a
couple uv skiffs across and wait on ’tother side.”

“I wasn’t thinking about them just now, Jeb; I was looking at those
birds.”

High up, through the fading twilight, a bird sped above the lake, toward
the south. Its course was straight as an arrow. Above it a larger bird
hovered and circled but the smaller bird went straight upon its way, as
if bent upon some important mission.

Then, suddenly, the larger bird swooped and there was only the one object
left in the dim vast sky where, a moment before, there had been two.

“Get me my rifle,” said Jeb.

As Raymond hurried back with it, he could see the wings of the big bird
flapping in the fury of its murderous work. What was going on up there he
could only picture in his mind’s eye, but the thought of that smaller
bird hurrying on its harmless errand—homeward to its nest, perhaps—and
waylaid and murdered up there in the lonely half darkness, troubled him
and his hand trembled perceptibly as he handed the weapon to Jeb.

“You always hit ’em—fetch ’em—don’t you?” he asked, anxiously.

“Purty near.”

The sharp report rang out and echoed from the surrounding hills. Even
before it died away there lay at Raymond’s feet a hawk, quite dead, while
through the dim light in a pitiably futile effort to fly, the smaller
bird, a vivid speck of white in the fading twilight, fluttered to the
ground.

It proved to be a white pigeon, its feathers ruffled and stained with
blood and several of the stiffer feathers of the tail were gone entirely.
One wing drooped as the bird stumbled weakly about and an area of its
neck was bare where the feathers had been torn away. It seemed odd to
Raymond that the poor stricken thing should resume its clumsy strut,
poking its head this way and that, even in its weakness, and after such a
cruel experience.

But what he noticed particularly was a metal ring around the bird’s leg
from which hung a little transparent tube, like a large medical capsule,
with something inside it.

“Look, Jeb,” said he. “What’s that?”

Jeb lifted the bird carefully, folding the drooping wing into place, and
removed the little tube.

“You fetched him anyway, didn’t you, Jeb?”

“’Cause I _had_ ter—see?”

“We won’t have to kill it, will we, Jeb?”

“Reckon not. He don’t seem to be sufferin’ much uv any. Jes’ shook up, as
the feller says. Lucky he fell amongst friends. Let’s see wot he’s
brought us—he’s one of them carriers, son.”

Raymond said nothing, but watched eagerly as Jeb, leisurely and without
any excitement, opened the tiny receptacle and unrolled a piece of paper.
The boy knew well enough what carrier pigeons were and he was eager to
know the purport of that little roll of script. But even in his
excitement there lingered in his mind the picture of that faithful little
messenger, intent upon its errand, struck down by the ruthless bandit of
the air. He was glad the hawk was dead.

“Let’s hear wot he’s got ter say fer himself, son. You jes’ read it.”

The paper was thin and about the size of a dollar bill; it had been
folded lengthwise and then rolled up. It read:

  “Come right away. Governor hurt. Serious. Can’t leave. Will try to get
  to nearest village but am afraid to leave now. He fell and is bleeding
  bad. Think there’s something else the matter, too. Spotty died or would
  send.

                                                                  Jeff.”

Raymond gazed for a moment at Jeb, then down at the dead hawk, then at
the pigeon which Jeb still held, stroking it gently.

“It’ll never be delivered now, son, ’cause nobuddy ’cept this here little
feller knows whar he come frum nor whar he wuz goin’—do they, Pidge?”

“But somebody’s dying,” said Raymond.

“Sure enough, but we don’t know who ’tis nor _whar_ he is—nor whar his
friends is neither. An’ this here messenger here won’t tell us—he’s got
his own troubles. That thar hawk done more mischief than he thought for.”

For a few moments there was silence and Raymond gazed up into the
trackless, darkening sky through which this urgent call for help had been
borne. Where had it come from? For whom was it intended? Then he looked
down at the limp body of the bird whose cruel, bloody work had snatched
the last faint hope of succor from someone who lay dying.

“I—I’m glad you kil—fetched him, anyway——” said he.

The thought of those two unknown persons, the stricken one and his
frightened companion, waiting all in vain for the help which that
faithful messenger of the air should summon, and of that steadfast little
emissary, on whom so much depended, fallen here into strange hands,
sobered and yet agitated the boy, and he was silent in the utter
helplessness of doing anything.

“Naow, if yer could ony tell whar yer wuz goin’ or whar yer wuz comin’
frum, Pidge, we’d be much obleeged,” said Jeb; “but you wouldn’t, would
yer,” he added, stroking the bird, “’n’ I ain’t much uv a hand at pickin’
trails in th’air, bein’ as I growed up on th’hard ground.”

“Nobody can follow trails in the air,” said Raymond by way of comforting
Jeb. “Gee, nobody could do that. But it’s terrible, isn’t it?”

He looked up into the sky again as if he hoped it might still show some
sign of path or trail, and as he did so a loud bark, a sort of harsh
_Haa-Haa_, came through the growing darkness from across the lake, and
reverberated in swelling chorus from the frowning heights roundabout.
Then there was a long, plaintive bellow which died away as softly and as
gradually as the day itself dies, and this again was followed, as it
seemed, by the happy music of applauding hands, as if in acknowledgment
of the long echoed refrain.

“Oh, they’re here! They’re here!” cried Raymond. “That was the Silver Fox
call—and the Elks—and Garry’s with them—he made that Beaver call to let
me know——”

Just at that moment the dense brush across the lake parted and a boy,
bareheaded and wearing a grey flannel shirt, emerged on the shore.

“Oh, Tom! It’s Tom Slade!” cried Raymond, forgetting all else in his
ecstasy. “Hello, Tom, you big—you big——” But he couldn’t think of any
epithet to fit the occasion.




                               CHAPTER II
                         TOM SURPRISES THE CAMP


“Believe _me_, it was good to get our feet on terra-cotta—I mean terra
firma. I don’t want any more life on the ocean wave for at least two
weeks. I’m sorry we didn’t christen that boat the _Sardine Box_. _Good
Turn_—you can’t even turn around in it!”

“You shouldn’t look a gift horse in the mouth,” someone laughed.

“You can look a gift boat in the cabin, can’t you,” continued Roy. “We
were crowded in the cabin, not a soul would dare to move. That boat is
all right for three scouts like last year, but for three patrols—go-o-d
night! There wasn’t even room to flop a rice cake over—we had to eat them
browned on one side—there was a wrong and a right to them. Never again!
What we want is a sump-tu-ous yacht like that one moored at Catskill
Landing!”

“Wal, ye did hev quite a crowd aboard, sure enough,” laughed Jeb, who
always enjoyed Roy’s nonsense.

“Sure, pick out the one you want and I’ll drown the rest,” said Roy;
“except Pee-wee, we’re going to keep him till he gets his eyes open.”

Pee-wee Harris, Silver Fox and troop mascot, splashed the oar from his
seat in an adjoining boat, giving Roy a gratuitous bath.

“Did you have any adventures?” Raymond managed to ask.

“Oceans of them—I mean rivers. We got three points out of our course and
went twenty miles up a tributary.”

“That’s some word,” someone called.

“That’s a peach of a word, comes from the Greek word _Bute_, meaning
beautiful, and the Irish word _Terry_. It was all on account of Pee-wee’s
ignorance of geography. He thought the Hudson rose in Roseville,
Pennsylvania.”

“What!” shouted Pee-wee.

“I’ll leave it to our beloved scoutmaster.”

“Our beloved scoutmaster,” who was rowing one of the skiffs, only smiled.

“I know more about geography than you do,” shouted the irrepressible
Pee-wee; “_he_ thought Newburgh was below Peekskill,” he added,
contemptuously.

“_He_ thought Sandy Hook was a Scotchman,” retorted Roy. “Well, what’s
the news, Jeb, anyway?”

“Yer didn’t give us no chance ter tell yer,” drawled Jeb, as they drew
the boats up on shore. “Mebbe yer think yer wuz the fust arrivals, but
yer wuzn’t.”

It was good to hear Roy’s familiar nonsense; Raymond, who was quiet and
easily amused, saw with joy that the ancient hostilities between Roy and
Pee-wee were still in full swing; and for all Roy’s dubious picture of an
overcrowded boat (and so it must have been) they had found it possible to
stop down the river for Garry Everson and bring him along.

“Last of the Mohicans,” said Roy, as he dragged Garry forward; “all
that’s left of the famous Edgevale troop—left over from last summer. The
only original has-been. Them wuz the happy days.”

There was Tom Slade, too, quiet and stolid as he always was and with no
more sign of the scout regalia than he had shown when he was a hoodlum
down in Barrel Alley. His gray flannel shirt and last year’s khaki
trousers were in odd contrast to the new outfits which the other members
of the Bridgeboro Troop wore. But then Tom was in odd contrast with
everything and everybody anyway.

Two troops which had come up by the train had joined them at Catskill
Landing so the new arrivals descended like an all-conquering host upon
the quiet monotony of the big camp.

“And I’m going to stay till September,” said Raymond, clinging to Garry
and talking to both Garry and Roy. “Mr. Temple sent the money. Do you
remember how I couldn’t raise the flag last summer?”

“You were about as tough as a Welsbach gas mantel last summer,” laughed
Roy.

“Well, now I can raise it with one hand and I can hike to Leeds and back.
But listen—_listen_; we’ve got a mystery—it just happened——”

“Give it to Tom,” laughed Roy. “He’s the fellow for mysteries.”

But in another minute he had abandoned his gay tone as the little company
stood gazing down upon the dead hawk, while Jeb held a lantern, and
listened to Raymond’s breathless account of what had happened.

It had a sobering effect upon them all, and as Mr. Ellsworth, the
Bridgeboro Troop’s scoutmaster, held that pathetic note and read it in
the lantern light, with the scouts clustering about him, he shook his
head ruefully.

The note was passed about among the boys, who fingered it curiously.

“It’s a stalking blank, isn’t it,” said Tom, as he handed it to Westy
Martin, of the Silver Foxes, who wore the stalking badge. “The printed
part has been torn off so’s to get it into that little holder. See?” he
added, rubbing his finger along the edge, “it came off a pad—a stalking
pad—one of——” and he named the sporting goods concern which made them.
“It’s the same kind you and I used at Salmon River.”

The announcement, made in Tom’s usual stolid, half-interested way, fell
like a bombshell among them.

“Oh, can we find them? Can we find them?” cried Raymond.

“I’m afraid that doesn’t do us much good,” said Mr. Ellsworth. “We
already knew that the message was sent from some isolated place or help
would have been procurable. That being the case, I don’t see how the
sender happened to have a pigeon handy.”

“He had more than one, don’t you see?” said Tom, quietly, “but the other
died—Spotty. It must have been sent by some one who’s stalking and a
fellow who’s that much interested in birds would be just the kind of a
fellow that might have carrier pigeons—it’s good sport.”

“Yes, but where is he—or they? There’s two of them, anyway,” said Doc
Carson.

“That’s for us to find out,” said Tom. “I’m not going to sit down here
and eat my supper with someone dying.” He kicked the body of the hawk
slightly as if to express his disgust that this insignificant creature
could cause such trouble and baffle even scouts. “We don’t know much
about it but we’ll have to use what little we do know. I know that when
people try out carrier pigeons they always get a high ground, and I know
that up on that hill over there—in the woods—there were chalk marks on
the trees last summer. Maybe someone was stalking there then. Anyway, I’m
going to get to the top of that hill and see if I can find anyone up
there. I want Doc to go with me. Anybody else can go that wants to. If
there’s anybody there we’ll wigwag or [1]smudge it to you in the
morning.”

For a moment there was silence. It was exactly like Tom to blurt out his
plans with a kind of stolid bluntness, and if he had contemplated a trip
to the moon he would have announced it in the same dull way. He seldom
asked advice and as seldom asked authority. He was a kind of law unto
himself. If anyone knew how to take Tom it was Roy Blakeley, but Roy
often threw up his hands in despair and said he gave it up—Tom was a
puzzle. He stood there among them now, his face about as expressionless
as an Indian’s—coarse gray flannel shirt open halfway down to his waist,
a strap by way of a belt, and his shock of thick hair down on his
forehead. Why he had eschewed the scout regalia while the others came
resplendent in their new outfits was a mystery. What advantage over a
belt the thin strap had, no one knew.

“Oh, I’ll go with you! I’ll go with you!” shouted the irrepressible
Pee-wee. “I’ll——”

“You’ll just sit down and have some supper,” laughed Mr. Ellsworth.

It is to be feared that the scoutmaster had small hope of anything coming
from Tom’s proposed expedition, but he was not the one to discourage his
scouts nor obtrude his authority. So the little party was made up (for
whatever slight prospect of success it might afford) of Tom, Doc Carson,
Raven and First Aid Scout, Connie Bennet of Tom’s patrol, and Garry
Everson who, though not a member of the troop, was asked because of his
proficiency in signalling. Roy, who would naturally have gone, was asked
by Mr. Ellsworth to remain at camp to help him get the troop’s baggage
distributed in the several cabins that had been reserved for them.

So the four scouts, having taken a hasty bite of supper, set out in the
darkness on their all but hopeless errand. Tom carried a lantern; across
Doc Carson’s back was slung the folding stretcher; Connie Bennet carried
the bandages and first-aid case, and all wore belt axes, for the hill
which they meant to climb was covered with a dense thicket and even in
the lower land between it and the camp there was no sign of path or trail
after the first mile or so.




                              CHAPTER III
                          ROY’S CAMPFIRE YARN


“That’s what you get for being small,” sighed Pee-wee to Raymond
Hollister, as they strolled about together while waiting for supper.
“When you say you want to go with them or tell them about an idea you
have, they just laugh at you, or don’t pay any attention. It just goes in
one ear and out the other—because there’s nothing to stop it, as Roy
says. Gee, you have to laugh at that feller. He makes me awful mad
sometimes—when he gets to jollying—but you have to laugh at him.”

“Do you know what he told me last summer?” said Raymond; “he was telling
me about the echoes and he said if I called Merry Christmas good and hard
it would answer Happy New Year!”

“That’s just like him,” said Pee-wee, “you have to look out for him. When
I first joined his patrol he told me a lot of stuff. He said if a feller
had a malicious look it was a sign he belonged to the militia. He’ll be
jollying you and me all the time we’re here—you see if he isn’t. He calls
me a scoutlet. And it’ll be the same with you, only worse, because you’re
even smaller than I am. What do you say we stick together?”

“I’ll do it,” said Raymond, “but I like Roy,” he added. “I like him
better than any of your patrol—I like him better than Tom Slade—a good
deal.”

“Tom isn’t so bad,” said Pee-wee, “but he’s kind of queer.”

“He doesn’t look like a scout at all—not this year,” said Raymond.

“He’s thinking mostly about his patrol,” said Pee-wee, “he’s nutty about
his patrol. He needs one more member. Roy and two or three others—Westy,
he’s pretty near as bad—they made a big rag doll with a punkin for a head
and brought it to scout meeting as a new member for Tom’s patrol. Coming
up the river there was a scarecrow in a field and Roy said, ‘There’s your
new member for you, Tom.’ Oh, gee, but we did have some fun cruising up.
Sometimes I got mad when they kidded me, but most of the time I had to
laugh—especially when Roy gave an imitation of a dying radiator—gee, that
feller’s the limit!”

Raymond enjoyed these tidbits of gossip about the Bridgeboro Troop, the
members of which were all more or less heroes to him.

“I like Garry best of all,” he suddenly announced.

“Everybody likes him,” said Pee-wee.

“He’s just as smart as any scout in your troop,” Raymond added, with the
faintest note of challenge in his tone.

The welcome sound of the supper horn brought their talk to an end. It was
a merry company that gathered about one of the three long boards (the
other two were as yet unused) and to the scouts who were visiting Temple
Camp for the first time this late evening meal, served by lantern light
under the sombre trees with the still, black lake hard by and the
frowning hills encompassing them, was most delightful.

There were few among them (least of all Jeb and the scoutmaster) who
believed that anything would be accomplished by Tom’s expedition but even
a hopeless enterprise seemed more scoutish than doing nothing and Mr.
Ellsworth was certainly not the one to deny his scouts any adventure even
though it offered nothing more than a forlorn hope.

After supper some one suggested campfire and soon the cheerful, crackling
blaze which seems to typify the very spirit of scouting was luring the
boys back from pavilion and cabin and they lolled on the ground about it
as it grew in volume and glittered in the black water.

“What d’you say we tell riddles?” suggested Pee-wee.

“All right,” said Roy, who was poking the fire. “Riddle number one, How
much is twice?”

“Do you stir your coffee with your left hand?” shouted Pee-wee.

“No, with a spoon,” said Roy; “no sooner said than stung!”

“Tell a story, Roy,” some one called, and half dozen others, who had
already fallen under Roy’s spell, chimed in, “Sure, go ahead—story,
story!”

“Well,” said Roy, drawing his knees up and clasping his hands about them.
“Once there was a scout—anybody got a harmonica for some soft music? No?
Well, once there was a scout and he was tracking. He came to a stone wall
and in climbing over it he fell.”

“Scouts don’t fall,” shouted the irrepressible Pee-wee.

“Who’s telling this?” said Roy. “As he was climbing over the stone wall
he fell. He fell on his face—and hurt his feelings. He was
self-conscious—I mean sub-conscious—I mean unconscious. He shouted for
help.”

“When he was unconscious?” ventured Raymond.

“Sure. But no help came. The sun was slowly sinking. The scout was a
fiend on first-aid. He opened his case and got out a bottle of camphor.
He smelled it. He opened his eyes slowly and came to——”

“You make me sick!” shouted Pee-wee.

“There was a big scratch on his knee,” Roy continued. “There was a hole
in his stocking—about as big as a seventy-five cent piece. He looked
about but could not find the piece of stocking the size of a seventy-five
cent piece that had come out of the hole. Where was it? The hole was
there—the whole hole; but where was the part of the stocking that had
been in the hole? He looked about.”

“Topple him over backwards, will you!” called Pee-wee, in a disgusted
appeal to Roy’s nearest neighbor.

“He looked about some more. Then he sat up. Then he sat down. He was a
scout—he was resourceful. He happened to remember that once he had eaten
a doughnut. The doughnut had a hole in it. The hole disappeared. He said
to himself——”

But he was not allowed to go further, for somebody inverted him according
to Pee-wee’s suggestion, and when the general laugh had subsided a boy
who had said very little spoke up, half laughing but evidently in earnest
and greatly interested in Roy.

“While we were rowing across the lake,” he said, “you made some remark
about your motor-boat being overcrowded on the trip up and I got an idea
from some things that were said that two or three of you came up here
alone last year. It struck me that you might have had some interesting
experiences from the way you spoke. I wanted to go with your friends off
to that hill, but I didn’t just like to ask——”

“That’s the trouble with him,” a smaller boy beside him, who was
evidently his friend, piped up. “He doesn’t like to butt in—gee, you’d
never think he was a hero from the way he acts—or the way he talks
either.”

The older boy took the general laugh good-naturedly. “I was just
wondering,” he said, “if you wouldn’t tell us something about your trip.”

“_He’s_ had a lot of adventures, too,” piped up the smaller boy, “and
saved people’s lives—and things—and won plaudits——”

“Won _what_?” someone queried.

“Plaudits,” he repeated; “they are things like—like—well, applause, kind
of. But he don’t know very much about girls, though.”

“And what is _your_ name?” asked Mr. Ellsworth, amid the general
laughter.

“Gordon Lord—and his is Harry Arnold—he can swim two miles and back and
he can—he can—he can make raisin pudding,” he concluded, lamely. “And
he’s got a tattoo mark on his arm.”

“Delaware?” Roy queried, smiling across the blaze at Arnold.

“No, New Jersey—Oakwood, New Jersey—First Oakwood Troop—Hawk Patrol, we
are. I guess we’re a little bit ashamed of our patrol name just now.”

There was silence for a minute as all thought of the tragic message which
had fallen into the camp.

“You should worry about the name,” said Roy.

“I don’t suppose there’s anything we can do,” said Mr. Ellsworth, voicing
the thought which held all silent, “but sit here and wait, and if we’re
sensible we won’t hope for too much. Come, Roy, let our new friends hear
about you boys coming up in the _Good Turn_.”

“It isn’t that big cruiser down at Catskill Landing, is it?” Arnold
inquired. “We saw that as we got off the train.”

“No, that’s the kind of a yacht boys have in twenty-five cent stories,”
said Roy; “I saw that one; it’s a pippin, isn’t it? Guess it belongs to a
millionaire, hey? No, ours is just a little cabin launch—poor, but
honest, tangoes along at about six miles an hour and isn’t ashamed. Do
you want the full story?”

“If there aren’t any stockings and stone-walls in it,” someone suggested.

“All right, here goes,” said Roy, settling, himself into his favorite
posture before the fire, with his hands clasped about his drawn-up knees
and the bright blaze lighting up his face.

“You see, it was this way. Pee-wee Harris is the what’d you say his name
is—Lord? Pee-wee Harris over there is the Gordon Lord of our troop. And
Tom Slade is our famous detective—Sherlock Nobody Holmes.

“Well, Tom and Pee-wee and I started ahead of the others last summer to
hike it up here. Pee-wee got very tired (here he dodged a missile from
Pee-wee) and so we were all glad when we got a little above Nyack and
things began to happen. They happened in large chunks.

“On the way up Pee-wee captured a pet bird that belonged to a little girl
(oh, he’s a regular gallant little lad, he is); he got the bird down out
of a tree for her and to show how happy she was she began to cry.”

“Gee, they’re awful funny, ain’t they?” commented Gordon Lord.

“Well, we beat it along till we hit the Hudson, then we started north.
The shadows of night were falling.”

“You read that in a book,” interrupted Pee-wee.

Little Raymond was greatly amused. So was Mr. Ellsworth who poked up the
fire and resumed his seat on the old bench beside Jeb Rushmore.

“Team work,” someone suggested, slyly, indicating Gordon and Pee-wee.

“The kindergarten class will please be quiet,” said Roy. “I repeat, the
shadows of night were tumbling. It began to rain. And it rained, and it
rained—and it rained.

“Suddenly, we saw this boat—we thought it was a shanty at first—in the
middle of a big marsh. So we plowed our way through the muck and crawled
into it. Pity the poor sailors on a night like that!

“Well, believe me, it was too sweet for anything in that old cabin.
Pee-wee wasn’t homesick any more (here Roy dodged again) and we settled
down for the night. The rain came down in sheets and pillowcases and
things and the cruel wind played havoc—I mean it blew—and shook the old
boat just as if she’d been in the water. But what cared we—yo, ho, my
lads—we cared naught!

“Well, in the morning along came an old codger with a badge and said he
was a sheriff. He was looking for an escaped convict and we didn’t suit.
He told us the boat was owned by an old grouch in Nyack and said if we
didn’t want to be arrested for trespassing and destroying property we’d
better beat it. He told us some more about the old grouch, and I guess
Pee-wee and I thought the best thing to do was to hike it right along for
Haverstraw and not wait for trouble. We had chopped up a couple of old
stanchions for firewood—worth about two Canadian dimes, they were, but
our friend said old What’s-his-name would be only too glad to call that
stealing and send us to jail. Honest, that old hulk was a _sight_. You
wouldn’t have thought anybody would want to admit that he owned such a
ramshackle old pile of junk and that’s why we made so free with it.

“Well, zip goes the fillum! Here’s where Tom comes on the scene. He said
that if that was the kind of a gink Old Crusty was we’d have to go and
see him and tell him what we’d done. He just blurted it out in that sober
way of his and Pee-wee was scared out of his——”

This time Pee-wee landed a wad of uprooted grass in Roy’s face.

“Pee-wee, as I said, was—with us (dodging again). The sheriff must have
thought Tom was crazy. He gave us a—some kind of a scope—what d’you call
it—when they read your fortune?”

“Horoscope?” suggested Arnold, smiling.

“Correct—I thank you. He told us that we’d be in jail by night. You ought
to have seen Pee-wee stare. I told him _he_ ought not to kick—he’d been
shouting for adventures and here was a good one. So we trotted back to
Nyack behind Tom and strode boldly up to Old Crusty’s office and—here’s
where the film changes—”

“Go ahead,” said Arnold. “You’ve got me started now.”

“Well, who do you think Old Crusty was?”

“Not the escaped convict!”

“Not on your life! He turned out to be the father of the little girl
whose pet bird Pee-wee had captured the day before.”

“The plot grows thinner,” said someone.

“Well, he had all the signs of an old grouch, hair ruffled up, spectacles
half-way down his nose—but he fell for Pee-wee, you can bet.

“When he found out who we were (the girl must have told him about us, I
suppose) he got kind of interested and when Pee-wee started to explain
things he couldn’t keep from laughing. Well, in the end he said the only
way we could square ourselves was to take the boat away; he said it
belonged to his son who was dead, and that he didn’t want it and we were
welcome to it and he’d send us a couple of men to help us launch it. He
seemed to feel pretty bad when he mentioned his son and we were so
surprised and excited at getting the boat that we just stood there
gaping. Gee, how can you thank a man when he gives you a cabin launch?”

Arnold shook his head.

“Well, we spent a couple of days and eight dollars and fifty-two cents
fixing the boat up and then, sure enough, along came two men and Mr.
Stanton’s chauffeur to jack the boat over and launch her for us. The girl
came along, too, in their auto, and oh, wasn’t she tickled! Brought us a
lot of eats and a flag she’d made, and stayed to wish us—what do you call
it?”

“Bon voyage?”

“Correct—I thank you. Understand, I’m only giving you the facts. We had
more fun those three days and that night launching the boat than you
could shake a stick at. Well, when we got her in the water I noticed the
girl had gone off a little way and kept staring at it. Gee, the boat did
look pretty nice when she got in the water. I thought maybe she was kind
of thinking about her brother, you know, and it put it into my head to
ask one of the men how he died. She didn’t come near us while we talked,
but stood off there by herself staring at the launch. You see, it was the
first time she’d seen it in the water since he was lost, and she was
almost crying—I could tell that.

“Well, this is what the man told me. They said this Harry Stanton and
another fellow named Benty Willis were out in the launch on a stormy
night. There was a skiff belonging to the launch, and people thought they
must have been in that, fishing. Anyway, the next morning, they found the
skiff broken and swamped to her gunwale and right near it the body of the
other fellow. The launch was riding on her anchor same as the night
before. The men said Mr. Stanton was so broken up that he had the boat
hauled ashore and a flood carried her up on the marsh where she was going
to pieces when we found her. He would never look at her again. They said
Harry Stanton could swim and that made some people think that maybe they
were run down by one of the big night boats on the Hudson and that Harry
was injured—killed that way, maybe.

“Anyway, when the girl got in the auto and said good-bye to us I could
see she’d been crying all right, and she said we must be careful and not
run at night on account of the big liners.”

“Hmph,” said Arnold, thoughtfully.

“Gee, I’ll never forget that night, with her sitting in the auto ready to
start home and the boat rocking in the water and waiting for us. I can’t
stand seeing a girl cry, can you? I guess we all felt kind of sober when
we said good-bye and she told us to be careful. Tom told her we’d try to
do a _real_ good turn some day to pay her back, because we really owed it
to her, you know, and there was something in the way he said it—you know
how Tom blurts things out—that made me think he had an idea up his
sleeve.

“Well, it was about an hour later, while we were sitting on the cabin
roof, that Tom sprung it on us. We were going to start up river in the
morning; we were just loafing—gee, it was nice in the moonlight!—when he
said it would be a great thing for us to find Harry Stanton! Go-o-d
ni-i-ght! I was kind of sore at him because I didn’t like to hear him
joking, sort of, about a fellow that was dead, especially after what the
fellow’s father and sister had done for us, but he came right back at me
by pointing to the board we had the oil stove on. What do you think he
did? He showed us the letters N Y M P H under the fresh paint and said
that board was part of the launch’s old skiff and wanted to know how it
got back to the launch. What do you know about that? You see, we had run
short of paint and it was thin on that board because we’d mixed gasoline
with it. We ought to have mixed it with cod liver oil, hey?

“So there you are,” concluded Roy; “Pee-wee and I just stared like a
couple of gumps. Those fellows had been out in the skiff and they
couldn’t have used it with that side plank ripped off. And how did it get
back to the launch?”

“Sounds as if the man might have been right about the skiff being smashed
by a big boat,” said Arnold. “Maybe Harry Stanton was injured and clung
to that board. But why should he have pulled it aboard the launch? And
what I can’t understand is that nobody should have noticed it except you
fellows. Was it in the launch all the time?”

“Yup—right under one of the lockers. Pee-wee and I had hauled it out to
make a shelf for the oil stove.”

“But how do you suppose it was no one had noticed it till you fellows got
busy with the boat?”

“A scout is observant,” said Roy, laughingly.

“Hmph—it’s mighty interesting, anyway,” mused Arnold. He drummed on a log
with his fingers, and for a few moments no one spoke.

“Some mystery, hey?” said Roy, adding a log to the fire.




                               CHAPTER IV
                             THE OLD TRAIL


Several things more or less firmly fixed in his mind had impelled Tom
Slade to challenge that wooded hill the dense summit of which was visible
by day from Temple Camp.

He knew that high land is always selected for despatching carrier
pigeons; a certain book on stalking which he had read contained a chapter
on this fascinating and often useful sport and he knew that in a general
sort of way there was a connection between carrier pigeons and stalking;
one suggested the other—to him, at least. He knew for a certainty that
the message had been written on the unprinted part of a stalking blank
and he knew also that on the slope of the hill he had seen chalk marks on
the trees the previous summer. Tom seldom forgot anything.

All these facts, whether significant or not, were indelibly impressed
upon his serious mind, and to him they seemed to bear relation to each
other. He believed that the pigeon had been flying homeward, to some town
or city not far distant, where the sender perhaps lived and he believed
that the pigeon’s use in this emergency had been the happy thought of
some person who had taken the bird to the hill only to use for sport. He
had no doubt that somewhere in the wilderness of these Catskill hills was
a camp where the victim of accident lay, but the weak point was that he
was seeking a needle in a haystack.

“I wish we’d brought along the fog horn from the boat,” he said, as they
made their way across the open country below the hill; “we could have
made a lot of noise with it up there; you can hear a long way in the
woods, and it might have helped us to find the place.”

“If the place is up there,” said Doc Carson.

“There’s a trail,” said Tom, “that runs about halfway up but it peters
out at a brook and you can’t find any from there on.”

“If we could find the trees where you saw the marks last summer,” said
Connie Bennet, “we might get next to some clue there.”

“I can usually find a place where I’ve been before,” said Tom.

“What’s the matter with following the brook when we get to it?” said
Garry. “If there’s anyone camping there they’d have to be near water.”

“Good idea,” said Doc.

“That settles one thing I was trying to dope out,” said Tom. “Why should
people come as far as that just to stalk?”

“Maybe they’re scouts, camping.”

“They’d have smudged up the whole sky with signals,” said Tom.

“Maybe it’s someone up there hunting.”

“Only it isn’t the season,” laughed Garry. “No sooner said than stung, as
Roy would say. Gee, I wish he was along!”

“Same here,” said Doc.

“They’re probably there fishing,” said Tom. “The stalking business is a
side issue, most likely.”

“That’s what the little brook whispers to us,” said Doc.

They all laughed except Tom. He was not much on laughing, though Roy
could usually reach him.

The woods began abruptly at the foot of the hill and they skirted its
edge for a little way holding their lantern to the ground so as to find
the trail. But no sign of path revealed itself. Twice they fancied they
could see, or _sense_, as Jeb would have said, an opening into the dense
woods and the faintest suggestion of a trail but it petered out in both
cases—or perhaps it was imaginary.

“Let’s try what Jeb calls lassooing it,” said Garry.

He retreated through the open field to a lone tree which stood gaunt and
spectral in the night like a sentinel on guard before that vast woodland
army. Climbing up the tree, he called to Tom:

“Walk along the edge now and hold your lantern low.”

Tom skirted the wood’s edge, swinging his light this way and that as
Garry called to him. The idea of trying to discover the trail by taking a
distant and elevated view was a good one, but the tree was either too
near or too far or the light was too dim, and the four scouts knew not
what to do next.

“Climb up a little higher,” called Doc. “They say that when you’re up in
an aeroplane you can see all sorts of paths that people below never knew
about. I read that in an aviation magazine.”

“_The Fly-paper_, hey?” ventured Connie. “Look out for rotten branches,
Garry.”

Garry wriggled his way up among the small branches, as far as he dared,
while Tom moved about at the wood’s edge holding the lantern here and
there.

“Nothing doing,” said Garry, coming down.

“We’re up against it, for a fact,” said Doc.

“That’s just what we’re not,” retorted Connie. “It seems we’re nowhere
near it.”

“Gee-whillager!” cried Garry as he scrambled down the tree trunk. “Sling
me over the peroxide, will you!”

“What’s the matter?” asked Doc, interested at once.

“I’ve got a scratch. What Pee-wee would call an artificial abrasion.”

“Superficial?” laughed Doc, pouring peroxide on a pretty deep scratch on
Garry’s wrist.

“See there?” said Garry. “Feel. It’s sticking out from the trunk.”

As Tom held his lantern a small, rusty projection of iron was visible on
the trunk of the tree about five feet from the ground.

“Is it a nail?” asked Connie.

“Well-what-do-you-know-about-that?” said Garry. “It’s what’s left of a
hook; the tree has grown out all around it, don’t you see?”

It was indeed the rusty remnant of what had once been a hook but the
growing trunk had encased all except the end of it and the screws and
plate that fastened it were hidden somewhere within the tree.

“That tree has grown about an inch and a half thicker all the way around
since the hook was fastened to it,” said Doc.

“It’s an elm, isn’t it?” Garry said.

Tom thought a minute. “Elms, oaks,” he mused, “that means about ten or
twelve years ago.”

“There are only two reasons why people put hooks into trees,” said
Connie, after a moment’s silence; “for hammocks and to fasten horses to.
Nix on the hammocks here,” he added.

“What I was thinking about,” said Tom, “is that if somebody used to tie a
horse here it must have been so’s they could go into the woods. The trail
goes as far up as the brook. Maybe they used to tie their horses here and
go fishing. There ought to be a trail from this tree to where the trail
begins in the woods.”

“Probably there was—twelve years ago,” said Doc, dryly.

“The ground where a trail was is never just the same as where one
wasn’t,” said Tom, with a clumsy phraseology that was characteristic of
him. “It leaves a scar—like. When they started the Panama Canal they
found a trail that was used in the Fifteenth Century—an aviator found
it.”

“Well, then,” said Garry, cheerfully, “I’ll aviate to the top of this
tree again and take a squint straight down.”

“Shut your eyes and keep them shut,” Tom called up to him; “keep them
shut till I tell you.”

“Wait till Tom says peek-a-boo!” called Connie.

Tom gathered some twigs that were none too dry, and pouring a little
kerosene over them, kindled a small fire about six feet from the tree.

“Can you see down here all right?”

“Not with my eyes shut,” Garry answered.

“Well, open them,” said Tom, “and see if the leaves keep you from
seeing.”

“What he means,” called Doc, “is, have you an unobstructed view?”

There was always this tendency to make fun of Tom’s soberness.

“Wait till I look in my pocket,” called Garry. “Sure, I’ve got one.”

“Shut your eyes again and keep them shut,” commanded Tom.

“I have did it,” came from above.

With a couple of sticks which he manipulated like Chinese chopsticks, Tom
moved the fire a little to a spot which seemed to suit him better, then
retreated with his lantern to the wood’s edge.

“Now,” he called; “quick, what do you see? Quick!” he shouted. “You can’t
do it at all unless you do it quick!”

“To your left!” shouted Garry. “Down that way—farther—farther still—go
on—more. Hurry up! Just a—there you are!”

The boys ran to the spot where Tom stood and a few swings of the lantern
showed an unmistakable something—certainly not a path—hardly a trail—but
a way of lesser resistance, as one might say, into the dense wood
interior.

“Come on!” said Tom. “I hope the kerosene holds out—I dumped out a lot of
it.”

Instinctively, they fell back for him to lead the way and scarcely a tree
but he paused to consider whether he should pass to the left or the right
of it.

“What did you see?” Connie asked of Garry.

“I couldn’t tell you,” said Garry, still amazed at his own experience, “I
don’t know as I saw anything; I suppose I sensed it, as Jeb would say. It
was kind of like a little dirty green line from the tree and it kept
fading away the longer I had my eyes open. It wasn’t exactly a line,
either,” he corrected; “it was—oh, I don’t know what it was.”

“It was a ghost,” said Tom.

“That’s a good name for it,” conceded Garry.

“It’s the right name for it,” said Tom, with that blunt outspokenness
which had a savor of reprimand but which the boys usually took in good
part.

“That’s just about what I’d say it was,” Garry agreed.

“That’s what you ought to say it was,” said Tom, “because that’s what it
was.”

Doc winked at Garry, and Connie smiled.

“We get you, Steven,” he said to Tom.

“Even before there were any flying machines, scouts in Africa knew about
trail ghosts,” Tom said. “They’re all over, only you can’t see
them—except in special ways—like this. You can only see them for about
twenty seconds when you open your eyes. If I’d have told you to look
cross-eyed you could have seen it better.”

“Wouldn’t that have been a sight for mother’s boy!” said Garry. “Swinging
on a thin branch on the top of a tree and looking cross-eyed at a ghost!
I’d have had that Cheshire cat in _Alice in Wonderland_ beaten a mile.”

“Captain Crawford who died,” said Tom, “picked up a lot of them. The
higher up you are the better. In an aeroplane you needn’t even shut your
eyes.”

“Well, truth is stranger than friction, as Roy says,” said Connie; “this
trail we’re on now is no ghost, anyway—hey, Tomasso?”

Tom did not answer.

“I got a splinter in my finger, too,” said Garry.

“Must have been scratching your head,” said Connie.

“That’s what I get from seein’ things,” said Garry.

“We’ll string the life out of Pee-wee, hey?” said Doc. “Tell him we saw a
ghost——”

“We did,” Tom insisted.

“You mean Garry did,” said Doc. “Of course, we have to take his word for
it.”

“Buffalo Bill saw them, too,” said Tom, plodding on.

“Not Bill Cody!” ejaculated Doc, winking at Garry.

“Yes,” said Tom.

“Is it _possible_?” said Doc, “Where’d you read that—in the _Fly-paper_?”

“There’s a trail ghost a hundred miles long out in Utah that nobody on
the ground ever saw. Curtis followed it in his biplane,” said Tom.

“Fancy that!” said Doc.

Tom plodded on ahead of them, in his usual stolid manner. “I don’t say
you can always do it,” he said; “it’s kind of—something—there’s a long
word—sike——”

“Psychological?” said Doc. “We get you, Tomasso.”




                               CHAPTER V
                     ADVENTURE OF THE RESCUE PARTY


“I bet there are real ghosts in here,” said Garry, as they climbed the
slope which became more difficult as they went along.

“Regular ones, hey?” said Doc.

“Sure, the good old-fashioned kind.”

“No peek-a-boo ghosts,” said Garry.

“Well, you can knock ghosts all you want to,” said Connie, “but I always
found them white.”

“Slap him on the wrist, will you!” called Doc. “Believe _me_, this is
some impenetrable wilderness!”

“How?”

“Impenetrable wilderness—reduced to a common denominator, thick woods.”

Withal their bantering talk, it seemed indeed as if the woods might be
haunted, for with almost every step they took some crackling or rustling
sound could be heard, emphasized by the stillness. Now and again they
paused to listen to a light patter growing fainter and fainter, or a
sudden noise as of some startled denizen of the wood seeking a new
shelter. Ghostly shadows flitted here and there in the moonlight; and the
night breeze, soughing among the tree tops, wafted to the boys a
murmuring as of some living thing whose elusive tones now and again
counterfeited the human voice in seeming pain or fear.

The voices of the boys sounded crystal clear in the solemn stillness.
Once they paused, trying to locate an owl which seemed to be shrieking
its complaint at this intrusion of its domain. Again they stopped to
listen to the distant sound of falling water.

“That’s the brook, I guess,” said Tom.

Their approach to it seemed to sober the others, realizing as they did
that effort and resourcefulness were now imperative, and mindful, too,
though scarcely hopeful, that these might bring them face to face with a
tragic scene.

“Pretty tough, being up here all alone with somebody dying,” said Doc.

“You said something,” answered Garry.

They were entering an area of underbrush, where the trail ceased or was
completely obscured, so that there wasn’t even a ghost of it, as Doc
remarked. But the sound of the water guided them now and they worked
their way through such a dense maze of jungle as they had never expected
to encounter outside the tropics.

Tom, going ahead, tore the tangled growth away, or parted it enough to
squeeze through, the others following and carrying the stretcher and
first-aid case with greatest difficulty.

“How long is this surging thoroughfare, I wonder,” asked Garry.

“Don’t know,” said Tom. “I don’t seem to have my bearings at all.”

After a little while they emerged, scratched and dishevelled, at the
brook which tumbled over its pebbly bed in its devious path downward.

“We’re pretty high up, do you know that?” Doc observed.

“I don’t see as there’s much use hunting for marked trees,” Tom said. “I
must have come another way before. I don’t know where we’re at. What
d’you say we all shout together?”

This they did and the sound of their upraised voices reverberated in the
dense woods and shocked the still night, but no answering sound could be
heard save only the rippling of the brook.

“We stand about as much chance as a snowball in a blast furnace,” said
Garry.

“The thing to do,” said Tom, ignoring him, “is to follow this brook,
somebody on each side, and look for a trail. If there’s anybody here
they’ll be upstream; it’s too steep from here down. And one thing
sure—they’d have to have water. Lucky the moon’s out, but I wish we had
two lanterns.”

“We’ll be lucky if the oil in this one lasts,” Doc put in.

Following the stream was difficult enough, but it was easier than the
forest they had just come through and they picked their way along its
edge, Tom and Garry on one bank and Doc and Connie on the other.

“I don’t believe anyone’s been in this place in a thousand years; that’s
the way it looks to me,” said Doc.

“I’d say at least three thousand,” said Garry.

Tom paid no attention. He had paused and was holding his lantern over the
stream.

“Those four stones are in a pretty straight line,” he said. “Would you
say that was a ford?”

“Looks more like a Buick to me,” said Garry, but he added, “They _are_ in
a pretty straight line. I guess it’s a flivver, all right.”

“Look on that side,” said Tom, to the others. “Do you see anything over
there?”

He was looking carefully along the edge; of the water when Doc called
suddenly,

“Come over here with your light, quick!”

Tom and Garry crossed, stepping from stone to stone, and presently all
four were kneeling and examining in the lantern light one of those
commonplace things which sometimes send a thrill over the discoverer—a
human footprint. There upon that lonesome mountain, surrounded by the all
but impenetrable forest, was that simple, half-obliterated but
unmistakable token of a human presence. Tom thought he knew now how
Robinson Crusoe felt when he found the footprint in the sand.

The exposed roots of a tree formed ridges in the hard bank, where
footprints seemed quite impossible of detection, and it was in vain that
the boys sought for others. Yet here was this one, and so plain as to
show the criss-cross markings of a new sole.

“It’s from a rubber boot,” said Garry.

“There ought to be _some_ signs of others even if they’re not as clear as
this one,” said Tom. “Maybe whoever was wearing that boot slipped off one
of those stones and got it wet. That’s why it printed, probably. Anyway,
somebody crossed here and they were going up that way, that’s sure.”

They stood staring at the footprint, thoroughly sobered by its discovery.
They had penetrated into this rugged mountain in the hope of finding some
one, but the remoteness and wildness of the place had grown upon them and
the whole chaotic scene seemed so ill-associated with the presence of a
human being that now that they had actually found this silent token it
almost shocked them.

“Maybe the wind was wrong before,” said Tom. “What d’you say we call
again—all together? There don’t seem to be any path leading anywhere.”

They formed their hands into megaphones, calling loud and long, but there
was no answer save a long drawn out echo.

“Again,” said Tom, “and louder.”

Once more their voices rose in such stentorian chorus that it left them
breathless and Connie’s head was throbbing as from a blow.

“Hark!” said Doc. “Shhh.”

From somewhere far off came a sound, thin and spent with the distance,
which died away and seemed to mingle with the voice of the breeze; then
absolute silence.

“Did you hear that?”

“Nothing but a tree-toad,” said Garry.

They waited a minute to give the answering call a rest, if indeed it came
from human lips, then raised their voices once again in a long _Helloo_.

“Hear it?” whispered Connie. “It’s over there to the east. That’s no
tree-toad.”

Whatever the sound was, the distance was far too great for the sense of
any call to be understood. The voice was impersonal, vague, having scarce
more substance than a dream, but it thrilled the four boys and made them
feel as if the living spirit of that footprint at their feet was calling
to them out of the darkness.

“Even still I think it must be near the stream though it sounds way off
there,” Tom pointed; “we might head straight for the sound or we might
follow the stream up. It may go in that direction up a ways.”

They decided to trust to the brook’s guidance and to the probability of
its verging in the direction of the sound. It wound its way through
intertwined and over-arching thickets where they were forced to use their
belt-axes to chop their way through. Now and again they called as they
made their difficult way, challenged almost at every step by
obstructions. But they heard no answering voice.

After a while the path became less difficult; the very stream seemed to
breathe easier as it flowed through a comparatively open stretch, and the
four boys, torn and panting, plodded along, grateful for the relief.

“What’s that?” said Garry. “Look, do you see a streak of white way
ahead—just between those trees?”

“Yes,” panted Connie. “It’s a tent, I guess—thank goodness.”

“Let’s call again,” said Tom.

There was no answer and they plodded on, stooping under low-hanging or
broken branches, stepping cautiously over wet stones and picking their
way over great masses of jagged rock. Never before had they beheld a
scene of such wild confusion and desolation.

“Wait a minute,” said Tom, turning back where he stood upon a great rock
and holding his lantern above a crevice. “I thought I saw something white
down there.”

They gathered about him and looked down into a fissure at a sight which
unnerved them all, scouts though they were. For there, wedged between the
two converging walls of rock and plainly visible in the moonlight was a
skeleton, the few brown stringing remnants depending from it
unrecognizable as clothing.

Tom reached down and touched it with his belt-axe, and it collapsed and
fell rattling into the bed of the cleft. He held his lantern low for a
moment and gazed down into the crevice.

“This is some spooky place, believe _me_,” shivered Connie. “Who do you
suppose it was?”

A little farther on they came upon something which apparently explained
the presence of the skeleton. As they neared the spot where they had seen
what they thought to be a tent among the trees, they stopped aghast at
seeing among the branches of several elms that most pathetic and complete
of all wrecks, the tattered, twisted remnants of a great aeroplane. A few
silken shreds were blowing about the broken frame and beating against the
network of disordered wires and splintered wood.




                               CHAPTER VI
                          THE MOUNTAIN SHELTER


For a few moments they stared at the wreck and said nothing.

“Maybe it was Kinney,” suggested Doc, at last. “Do you remember about
Kinney?”

“Come on,” urged Tom.

Half reluctantly the others followed him, glancing back now and again
till the tattered mass became a shadowy speck and faded away in the
darkness.

“He started from somewhere above Albany,” said Doc, “and he was never
heard of again. I often heard my father speak about it and I read about
it in that aviation book that Roy loaned me.”

“He’s going to loan it to me when he gets it back from you,” said Connie;
“he says you’re a good bookkeeper.”

“Put away your little hammer,” laughed Garry.

“Some people in Poughkeepsie thought they heard the humming of the engine
at night,” said Doc, “and that’s what made people think he had got past
that point—but that’s all they ever knew. Some thought he must have gone
down in the river.”

“How long ago was it?” Garry asked.

Tom plodded on silently. It was well known of Tom that he could not think
of two things at once.

“Five or six years, I think,” said Doc.

“That would be too long a time for the wreck, seeing the condition it’s
in,” said Garry, “but anything less than that would be too short a time
for the skeleton.”

“Do you mean they were lost here at different times?” Connie asked.

“Looks that way to me.”

“If there are buzzards up here a skeleton might look like that in a month
or so,” Connie suggested.

“There aren’t any buzzards around here.”

“Sure there are,” said Doc. “Look at Buzzard’s Bay—it’s named for ’em.”

“It’s named for a man who had it wished on him,” said Garry. “You might
as well say that Pike’s Peak was named after the pikers that go there.”

“How long do you suppose that aeroplane’s been there?”

“Five or six years, maybe,” Doc said. “The frame’ll be as good as that
for ten years more. There’s nothing more to rot.”

“Well,” said Garry, “it looks to my keen scout eye as if that wreck had
been there for about six months and the skeleton for about six years.”

“Maybe if you had tried shutting your keen scout eye and opening it in a
hurry—— Hey, Tomasso?” teased Doc.

“Maybe they got here at the same time but the man lived for a while,” Tom
condescended to reply.

“You’ve got it just the wrong way round, my fraptious boy,” said Doc.
“The skeleton’s been here longer, if anything.”

“Did you see that hickory stick there—all worm-eaten?” Tom asked. “It had
some carving on it. None of these trees are hickory trees.”

“I saw it but I didn’t notice the carving,” said Doc, surprised.

“Didn’t you notice there weren’t any hickory trees anywhere around
there?” Tom asked.

“No, I didn’t—I’m a punk scout—I must be blind,” said Doc.

“You’re good on first-aid,” said Tom, indifferently.

“How’d you know it was hickory?” Connie asked.

“Because I can tell hickory,” said Tom, bluntly, “and it’s being all
worm-eaten proved it—kind of. That’s the trouble with hickory.”

They always had to make the best of Tom’s answers.

“I don’t know where he got the hickory stick,” he said, as he pushed
along through the underbrush, “but he didn’t get it anywhere around here,
that’s sure.”

“And he probably didn’t sit down that same day and carve things on it,
either,” suggested Garry; “Tom, you’re a wonder.”

“He might have lived up here for two or three years after he fell,” said
Doc reflectively. “Gee, it starts you thinking, don’t it?”

Connie shook his head. “It’s a mystery, all right,” said he.

The thought of the solitary man, disabled crippled, perhaps, living there
on that lonely mountain after the terrible accident which had brought him
there lent a new gruesomeness to their discoveries. And who but Tom Slade
would have been able to keep an open mind and to see so clearly by the
aid of trifling signs as to separate the two apparent catastrophes and
see them as independent occurrences?

“Tomasso, you’re the real scout,” said Doc. “The rest of us are only
imitations.”

Tom said nothing. He was used to this kind of talk and was about as proof
against such praise as a battleship is against a popgun. And just now he
was thinking of other things. Yet if he could have looked into the future
and seen there the extraordinary explanation of his discovery and known
the strange adventures it would lead to, he might have paused, even on
that all but hopeless errand of rescue, and looked again at those
pathetic remains. But those things were to be reserved for another
summer.

“Is there anything we can do? What do you suggest, Tom?” Garry asked,
dropping his half flippant manner.

“I say, let’s shout again,” said Tom. “We must be nearly a mile farther
on by now, and the brook’s getting around to the east, too.”

“Good and loud,” said Connie.

“All together—now!”

Again their voices woke the mountain echoes. A sudden rustling of the
underbrush told of some frightened wood creature. The brook rippled
softly as before. There was no other sound, and they waited. Then, from
somewhere far off came the faint answering of a human voice. It would
never have been distinguishable save in that deathlike stillness and even
there it sounded as if it might have come from another world. It seemed
to be uttering the letter L in a kind of doleful monotony.

They paused a moment in a kind of awe, even after it had ceased.

“It’s calling _help_,” said Garry.

“I can go there now,” said Tom. “The brook probably winds around that
way, but we can cut across and get there quicker. We’ll chop our way
through here. Let him rest his lungs now—I can go right for a ways. I got
to admit I was wrong.”

In the dim light of the lantern Garry looked at Tom as he stood there,
his heavy, stolid face scratched by the brambly thicket, his coarse shirt
torn, his thick shock of hair down over his forehead—no more elated by
triumph than he would have been discouraged by defeat, and as the
brighter, more vivacious and attractive boy looked at him he was seized
with a little twinge of remorse that he had made game of Tom’s clumsy
speech and sober ways.

“Got to admit you were wrong _how_—for goodness’ sake?” he said, almost
angrily. “Didn’t you bring us here? Didn’t you bring us all the way from
Temple Camp to where we could hear that voice calling for help? Didn’t
you?”

“I said I could find the trees that had the stalking marks last summer,”
said Tom, “and I got to admit I was wrong, ’cause I couldn’t.”

“Who was it that wouldn’t sit down and eat supper while somebody was
dying?” demanded Doc. “There’s a whole lot of good scouts, believe _me_,
but there’s only one Tom Slade!”

It was always the way—they made fun of him and lauded him by turns.

“There’s a kind of trail here,” said Tom, unmoved, “but it hasn’t been
used for a long time—see those spider webs across it? Lend me your axe,
will you, mine is all dulled.”

A hand-to-hand combat with more tangled underbrush, which they tore and
chopped away, brought them to comparatively open land which must have
been very high for they were surprised to see, far below, several
twinkling specks of light which they thought to be at Temple Camp. It was
the first open view they had had.

They called again, and again the voice answered, clearly audible now,
crying, “Help help!” and something more which the boys could not
understand. They called, telling the speaker not to come in search of
them, that they would come to him, and to answer them for guidance when
they called.

They plunged into more thicket, tearing it aside with a will, sometimes
going astray, then pausing to listen for the guiding voice, and pushing
on again through the labyrinth.

After a little they fell into a path and then could hear the brook
rushing over stones not far distant, and knew that it must verge to the
east as Tom had said and that the path did lead to it. It would have been
a long journey following the stream.

Soon a greater intercourse of speech was possible and they called
cheerily that they were scouts and for the waiter to cheer up for they
would soon be with him.

Presently, along the path they could hear the sound of footsteps. Tom,
who was leading the way, raised his lantern and just beyond the radius of
its flickering light they could see a dark figure hurrying toward them;
then a face, greatly distraught in the moonlight, and Tom stopped,
bewildered. As the stranger grasped his arm he held the light close to
the haggard, wild-eyed face.

“Hello,” he said, “I—I guess I know you. Let go—what’s the matter?
Weren’t you at Temple Camp last summer?”

The stranger, a young fellow of perhaps eighteen, shook his head.

“With one of the troops from——?”

“No,” said the young man.

“Hmn,” said Tom, still holding the lantern up; “I thought——Don’t you
fellows remember him?”

Connie shook his head; Garry also.

“Never saw him in my life,” said Doc.

“Hmn,” said Tom. “Maybe I——just for a minute I thought——I guess you
fellows are right.”

The stranger was dressed in the regulation camping outfit—the kind of
costume usually seen on dummies in the windows of sporting goods stores
in the spring, with a spick and span tent in the background, a model
lunch basket near by and a canoe crowded in. His nobby outfit was very
much the worse for wear, however, and he looked about as fresh as the
immaculate Phoebe Snow would look after a _real_ railroad journey.

“Maybe I can be rescued now,” he said imploringly, clinging to Tom. “I
saw the lights way down there. There was only one till tonight and
tonight I counted seven—little bits of ones. I tried to get to them, but
I got lost. You can’t go to them. It looks as if you can, but you can’t.
They’re just as far away, no matter how far you go—they get farther and
farther. Nobody can ever get away from here. Are you afraid of dead
people?”

“No,” said Doc. “We’re scouts. Is——”

“If a person looks very different, then he’s dead, isn’t he?”

“Come on,” said Doc. “We’ll see.”

“We’ll never get off this hill; I’ve tried every way——”

“Oh, yes, we will,” spoke up Garry, putting his arm over the boy’s
shoulder and urging him along.

They could see that he was hardly rational, and Garry, better than any of
the others, knew how to handle him.

“It’s terrible without a light,” he said; “I spilled all the oil—I’m glad
you’ve got a light.”

“What’s your name?” Garry asked.

“Jeffrey Waring—come on, I’ll show you the place.” He shuddered as he
spoke.

Once more Tom held his lantern up to the white, distracted face.

“_He_ was never at camp,” laughed Doc.

“Hmn,” said Tom, apparently but half convinced.

A few steps brought them to a little clearing where stood a rough shack.
Outside it, fastened against a tree, was a vegetable crate with bars
nailed across it—the silent evidence of departed pets. Several fishing
rods lay against a tree. Close by was a makeshift fireplace. On a rough
bunk inside the shack lay a man, no longer young, with iron gray hair.
His eyes were open and staring and one seemed larger than the other. Doc
felt his pulse and found that he was living.

“He fell on the rocks and hurt his arm—I think it’s broken,” said
Jeffrey. “It bled and I bandaged it.”

Doc raised the bandaged arm and it fell heavily. Removing the bandage
carefully he saw that the cut itself was not dangerous, but from
first-aid studies he thought the man was suffering from an apoplectic
stroke or something of that nature. He wondered if the injury to the arm
had not been incidental to the man’s seizure and sudden fall. People
sometimes lingered in an unconscious condition for days, he knew. It was
hardly a case for first-aid, but it was certainly a case for skill and
resource, for whatever happened the patient, dead or living, would have
to be taken away from this mountain camp.

With Garry’s help, he raised the victim into a recumbent posture, piling
everything available under the head while Connie hurried back and forth
to the brook, bringing wet applications for the head and neck.

There was no sign of returning consciousness and the question was how to
get the patient away down to Temple Camp where medical aid might be had,
and where any contingency might be best handled.

The four boys, greatly hampered in their discussion by Jeffrey, whose
long vigil had brought him to the verge of collapse, decided that it
would be quite useless to signal for help, since it would mean another
expedition with most of the difficulties of their own, even if attempted
after daybreak.

So they decided to wait for dawn, which happily would come soon, and with
the first sign of it to send a smudge signal that they were coming and to
have a doctor at camp. They believed that in the daylight they could
carry the patient back over the same path which they had so laboriously
opened and though delay was irksome this plan seemed the only feasible
one to follow.

Despite their weariness none could sleep, so they kindled a little fire
and sat about it chatting while they counted time, impatiently waiting
for the first streak of daylight.

It was then that they learned from the overwrought boy something of his
history, but they got it piecemeal and had to patch together as best they
could his rather disjointed talk.

“Is he your father?” Doc asked.

“No, he’s my uncle,” said Jeffrey. “He isn’t a real governor; I only call
him that. He’s eccentric—know what that is? If we hadn’t come trout
fishing it would have been all right. I could have sent my pigeons from
the boat—I’ve got a regular coop there—it cost thirty dollars.”

“But you like the stalking, don’t you?” Connie asked.

“Yes, but I can’t be quiet enough—I can’t sneak up to them. You have to
be quiet and stealthy when you stalk.”

They made out that Mr. Waring was something of a sportsman and was
wealthy and eccentric.

“We live in a big house in Vale Centre,” Jeffrey told them, “and we have
fountains and I have twenty-seven pigeons and two dogs—and I can have
anything I want except an automobile. I can’t have an automobile because
I’m nervous.”

“You don’t mean you live near Edgevale Village, down the Hudson?” Garry
asked in surprise. “I live about two miles from the Centre myself.”

“We live in a house that cost thousands and thousands of dollars, but I
like our boat best. If there’s a war we’re going to give it to the
government, but if there isn’t any war it’s going to be mine some day.”

It appeared that Jeffrey and his uncle lived alone, save for the
servants, and had cruised up the Hudson to Catskill Landing in their boat
for the trout fishing of which the old gentleman was fond. How the pair
had happened to penetrate to this isolated spot was not quite clear, but
the boys gathered that it had been a favorite haunt of Mr. Waring’s
youthful days.

“He told me he’d bring me and show me,” said Jeffrey, “and that we’d stay
here and catch fish and I could send my pigeons back to James—he’s our
chauffeur—and I’d get better so’s I could remember things better. Do you
think you get better living in the woods?”

“Surest thing you know,” said Garry.

The picture of the kindly old gentleman, bringing his none too robust
nephew to this lonely spot, which lingered in his memory perhaps as the
scene of woodland sports of his own boyhood, touched the four boys and
seemed to bring them in closer sympathy with the figure that lay prone
and motionless within the little shack.

“I can have anything I want,” Jeffrey told them again. “Spotty cost fifty
dollars, but he died. That’s because I was sick and my brain didn’t work
good. My other carrier cost thirty dollars and I sent him to James to
tell him the governor was hurt.”

The scouts told him the fate of the pigeon and of how they had received
the message.

“But we’ll never get away from here,” Jeffrey said hopelessly. “We’ll
never find our way back.”

With the first light of dawn Garry increased the dying blaze and sent the
smudge signal. Piling damp leaves on the fire he caused a straight thin
column of thick smoke to rise high into the air and by inverting the
deserted pigeon coop over this, and removing and replacing it as the
Morse code required, he imprinted against the vast gray dawn the words

                           COMING HAVE DOCTOR

They knew well enough that some one in the camp would keep sleepless
vigil, watching for just such a message. Three times the words were
spelled out in smoke to make sure that they would be caught and
understood.

To Jeffrey, whose only resource had been his pet pigeon and who had been
unnerved by his inability to find his way from the hill, the sending of
this message and the quiet orderly preparations for departure which
followed were the cause of gaping amazement. He clung to Garry, as the
others got his uncle onto the stretcher, and walked along at his side,
plying him with excited questions. Sometimes it was necessary for him to
take a corner while one of the scouts went ahead to open a way and then
his panic was pitiable.

It did not seem at all peculiar to the others that he should single out
Garry and cling to him, for everybody fell for Garry almost at first
sight. What they did notice was that he appeared to shun Tom, who,
indeed, was entitled to all his gratitude and was the hero of the
occasion if anyone was.

But then he was a queer boy anyway, and thoroughly shaken up by his
experience.

As for Garry, the sudden hit which he had apparently made quite amused
him.

“You should worry,” he said, laughingly to Tom.

And Tom shrugged his shoulders and smiled.




                              CHAPTER VII
                          “UNDER WHICH KING?”


“And, oh it was great the way you sent that signal. Gee, a smudge message
is no cinch—I always said so. You can talk about your wireless and your
wigwagging and semaphoring and fire signalling and all, but you got to
admit smudging is hardest of all—gee, you got to admit that!”

“It’s easy as pie,” said one of the group, making an imposing smudge upon
Gordon Lord’s round face by way of proof.

“Because,” continued Gordon, calmly wiping his cheek, “because you can’t
shut it off so sudden.”

“Something like you, hey, kiddo?” smiled his tall friend, Arnold, who
stood near him.

“It’s hard to read,” Gordon went on, undaunted, “but it’s even harder to
send. Of course, even if it had mistakes, _he_ could read it,” he added,
indicating Harry Arnold, “because he can do pretty nearly anything. But
you sure are a peach of a scout—gee, I got to admit that.”

Having thus delivered his verdict, he gave a tug to his stocking which
had a way of slipping down, as one might say, whenever his back was
turned.

“A scout’s got to be magmanigous,” he concluded, as he tugged up the
other stocking.

“Well, I thank you for the compliment,” laughed Garry Everson,
“undeserved though it be. I think the skill is always on the receiving
end but we won’t quarrel about it,” he added, turning to Arnold.

Little Raymond Hollister clung to Garry as if he feared the crowd might
kidnap him, his face beaming with pride at all this praise showered upon
his hero.

“When we were a patrol last year,” he ventured, “he received them as well
as sent them. Anybody that was here last summer can tell you how he saved
a fellow’s life, too.”

“Yes, but it was one of our troop that bandaged him,” piped up Pee-wee
Harris of the Silver Foxes; “it was Doc Carson.”

“You’ll lose your reputation,” someone laughed at Arnold, “if you don’t
look out.”

“Sure, watch your rep when the Bridgeboro Sprouts get started,” said Roy
Blakeley. “I guess we better put them to bed now, hadn’t we?” he asked,
winking at Jeb Rushmore. “The trouble with this blamed camp is, there are
too many heroes.”

“There isn’t anybody here can beat Harry being a hero!” Gordon bristled,
in prompt defense of his friend.

“Sure there is,” said Roy.

“Who?” Gordon demanded.

“Do you know Fat Burns?”

“No.”

“Well, put some on the fire and see,” said Roy.

Gordon ignored the laugh at his expense. “Even girls say so,” he said,
“Gee, I hope a girl knows a hero when she sees one.”

Little Raymond, still keeping close to Garry, laughed silently, but he
did not venture again into the arena.

“I reckon the real hero o’ this here business ain’t said nuthin’? and
ain’t hed nuthin’ said fur him, this far,” drawled Jeb.

“Right you are!” said Doc Carson. “Tomasso Slade.”

“Thou never spakest a truer word,” said Roy.

Tom stood among them, his hair still frowzled, his faded gray shirt torn,
his belt drawn much tighter than necessary, and a disfiguring scratch
across his rather lowering countenance. He did not look at all like the
scouts on the cover of _Boy’s Life_.

“I don’t see as anybody’s a hero in particular,” he said, disconcerted at
being brought into the limelight. “I don’t see’s you can be a hero just
climbing up a hill. That’s all we did. That girl in the munition factory
that stayed at her telephone when the shells were flying around—she was
what I call a hero.”

“She was a shero, Tomasso,” corrected Roy.

“I think Hobson was a hero, too,” Tom added soberly. “I’m satisfied to be
at the head of my patrol and be a first class scout——”

“And to have the gold cross,” someone interrupted, referring to his
winning of this coveted medal the previous summer.

“Well, of course, I’m glad I’ve got that, too,” Tom said. “Maybe if we
get into a war with Germany we’ll have a chance to be heroes, for
sure—like the English scouts. I ain’t neutral, anyway. I ain’t neutral
any more since last Tuesday.”

It was exactly like Tom to announce his repudiation of neutrality in this
sudden fashion and in face of his scoutmaster’s admonition that all the
troop should honor the President’s express wish. It was also exactly like
him to begin on one subject and to end with some blunt announcement on
another. His mention of “last Tuesday” referred to the torpedoing of a
ship by a German submarine.

“All right, Tom,” said Mr. Ellsworth, who understood him perfectly, “but
we mustn’t shout about it, you know, because we’re not in the war—”

“Torpedoing’s kind of like hitting below the belt,” said Tom, “but that
ain’t what I wanted to say. I didn’t say anything about that fellow till
they took his uncle away——”

“You mean Jeffrey here?”

“Yes—because it didn’t seem right—sort of. But now he’s here alone with
us, I suppose he’ll join one of the troops and I’d like to have him join
my patrol because I need one more member and I think he’ll be good on
stalking and I want a stalking badge in my patrol. Maybe he could come
back and live in Bridgeboro somewhere if his uncle should——”

“Surely, Tom,” said Mr. Ellsworth, quick to prevent him from finishing
his sentence.

“I don’t mean I want it just as a reward—’cause I don’t think I did
anything special. But I got just one more member to get and——”

There was a slight movement in the group and Jeffrey Waring brushed past
the others and grasped Garry’s arm.

“I want to be in _his_ club,” said he, looking almost imploringly at Mr.
Ellsworth. “I want to join _his_ class; he can send a message even better
than a pigeon can take it, and it’s _sure_ to get there. He can do it
just with smoke. I want to join _his_ class.”

He was greatly excited, as he always became when he talked and Garry
winking significantly at the Bridgeboro Troop’s scoutmaster, strolled
away with Jeffrey clinging to him and Raymond following.

Tom Slade stood motionless, stolid, and said not a word. Then, in a
moment, Roy Blakeley went over and stood beside him, resting his arm on
Tom’s shoulder.

Once, a couple of years before, when Tom was a hoodlum and John Temple
was an old grouch, the capitalist had strode down through a field where
Tom was trespassing, shouting threats and imprecations at the waif, whose
first impulse was to run. Turning to do so, he had found Roy Blakeley,
scout, standing by him, and had felt Roy’s arm on his shoulder. And Tom
Slade, hoodlum, did not run. Goodness, it seems like ancient history now,
with Tom head of a patrol and “Old Man” Temple founder and trustee of the
big Temple Camp!

But Mr. Ellsworth and Doc Carson and Westy and others of the Ravens and
Silver Foxes, remembered, and they noticed how Roy Blakeley stepped
forward now and put his arm over Tom’s shoulder, just as he had then.

“_You_ should worry, Tomasso,” they heard him say in an undertone.




                              CHAPTER VIII
                             JEFFREY WARING


The scene just described was in the Pow-wow Circle, as they called the
open space where the camp fire burned by night at Temple Camp. After a
difficult descent of the hill the boys had been met at the wood’s edge by
Jeb with more scouts, a couple of visiting scoutmasters and a physician
from the not far distant village. To Jeffrey, whose poor efforts had been
so futile and bewildering, this orderly sequel to Garry’s smudge signal
was nothing less than a miracle, and he gazed at the party from camp as
if they had dropped from the clouds.

Despite their burden and the special caution which had been necessary in
picking their way down, the descent had been easier than the laborious
journey in the dark the night before, but it was long past noontime when
they emerged at the edge of the woods.

Perhaps it was natural that Jeffrey, not knowing of that battle with the
thicket and the darkness should have seen the signalling as the most
astonishing feat, and since Doc had assumed responsibility for his
injured uncle and in a way superintended the descent, perhaps it was
natural too that the first-aid boy, who received a flattering comment
from the real doctor, should come second to Garry in his estimation.
Whatever his peculiarities, he certainly did not stint his hero-worship.
But Tom he disregarded altogether.

“Do you know why that is?” said Gordon Lord, of the First Oakwood, N. J.,
Troop, talking the thing over with Honorable Pee-wee Harris, of
Bridgeboro. “Do you know why that is?”

Pee-wee couldn’t guess, but he hazarded the observation that Jeffrey was
a kind of a _nut_.

“It’s because Tom Slade doesn’t wear any uniform,” said Gordon. “It’s the
uniform that gets people—specially girls. Gee, they all fall for the
uniform—everybody does. You wouldn’t catch _me_ going without it.”

“I don’t know why Tom doesn’t wear one,” said Pee-wee. “But even if he
did I don’t think girls would notice him much—he isn’t that kind. He’s
kind of clumsy, like. He worked after school all winter and he must have
got a lot of money saved up, but when Roy asked him if he wasn’t going to
get a suit and things, he said he wasn’t going to bother—he was more
comfortable that way. We all got new outfits this year. Mr. Ellsworth
says Tom’s a kind of a law inside himself—or something like that.”

It troubled Gordon that a boy who could do the things Tom had done should
eschew the khaki regalia, the hanging jack knife, the belt axe and the
scarf, and he spoke to Roy about it.

“Search me, kiddo,” said Roy. “He ought to have forty-’leven dollars and
some trading stamps saved up. He’s a thrifty soul and he sold the _Friday
Evening Pest_ all winter. It’s got me guessing. Maybe he’s sending it to
Belgium—he’s come out strong for the Allies now. He’s a sketch.”

The doctor had shaken his head when he looked at Mr. Waring, and said
that his life was hanging on a thread, and that the thread was pretty
sure to break. They took him to the little hospital in the village and
from there telegraphed to his home.

On the doctor’s suggestion, seconded by Jeb and the scoutmasters, the boy
was kept at camp awaiting developments, and it was well toward evening of
that first Sunday while they were waiting for supper, that the tension
and suspense relaxed somewhat in this general talk which had ended in
Jeffrey’s impulsive and rather surprising act.

To the great delight of Raymond the strange boy was allowed to bunk in
the little cabin with himself and Garry, where he spent practically the
whole of the next day watching Garry unpack his luggage and reading the
Scout Handbook, turning more than once to the chapter about signalling,
which he seemed to regard as a sort of sleight-of-hand.

He made an aimless tour about the camp, pausing here and there before
tent or cabin and chatting with the scouts who received him kindly
enough, listening to his rather rambling talk and affecting an interest
in the wealth and especially the boat, of which he was never weary of
boasting. He seemed fascinated with this view of real camp life. What the
boys really thought of him it would be hard to say, but they were for the
most part indulgent and if there were a few who yielded to the temptation
to jolly him, they were promptly discouraged by the others.

For Garry, however, there was less patience and Jeffrey more than once
felt moved to defend his hero against the plainer sort of abuse. The
sarcastic references to his chosen friend he did not quite appreciate.

Garry, indeed, was paying dearly (especially at the hands of the
Bridgeboro Troop) for his act of walking away with Jeffrey to the
humiliation and disappointment of Tom Slade.

“Well,” said one scout, who was raising the patrol pennant outside his
cabin as Jeffrey came along, “how do you think you like it?”

“Can you signal?” Jeffrey asked, as if that were really the important
subject.

“I’m not so worse at it,” the scout replied, “but I’m not much good as a
kidnapper.”

Jeffrey did not catch the sense of this. He looked at the boy for a
moment and then strolled on, pausing in front of the Silver Fox’s cabin,
where Roy Blakeley, Pee-wee Harris, and others of that notoriously
flippant patrol were building a couple of balsam beds outside, for the
overflow.

“Good-morning glory,” said Roy.

“How do you do drop—that’s the way you should answer him,” said Pee-wee;
“come right back at him—don’t let him get away with it.”

Jeffrey stared. “That’s a good thick one,” he said, referring to a branch
Roy was about to use.

“Sure, it was brought up on oatmeal,” said Roy. “Stand from under!”

Jeffrey hastened to get out of the way.

“How long is it?” said he.

“’Bout as long as a short circuit,” said Roy.

“What?”

“I said it’s a beautiful afternoon this morning,” said Roy. “Well, you
got wished onto the large Edgevale Patrol, hey? Three members. _Some_
patrol!”

“Whose cabin is that next one?” Jeffrey asked irrelevantly.

“That? That’s Mr. Rushmore’s cabin. He has charge of the grounds—all of
’em, even the coffee grounds.”

“What?” said Jeffrey.

“And the next cabin,” said Roy, “belongs to the Elks—Tom Slade.”

“I don’t like him so much,” said Jeffrey.

“You don’t, hey? Well, you might have got into a _regular_ patrol,” said
Roy, busy with his work. “It was up to you.”

Not having been of the party which rescued Jeffrey, and hence not having
had the same opportunity to observe him, Roy was not as patient with him
as some of the others.

“What’s the matter with you?” he demanded, wheeling about and becoming
serious. “Don’t you know who you’ve got to thank for getting you out of
your scrape? Don’t you know who saved you from starving up there? What’s
the matter with you, anyway? I know fellows who’d be glad of the chance
to get into the Elk Patrol. They’ve got the gold cross in that patrol,
let me tell you—and _sixteen merit badges_! And _you_, like a big chump,
pass it up, and run after that pair that isn’t any patrol at all! Let me
tell you something, my fraptious boy, in case you should ever get to be a
scout——”

“I _am_ a scout,” said Jeffrey, and doubtless he thought he was.

“There’s a little old book with a red cover you’ve got to take a squint
into before you’re a B. S., let me tell you. And it’s got some good dope
about making sacrifices and being generous and you can’t be a good scout
walking away with somebody else’s prize—you can’t! You tell your patrol
leader, or whatever you call him, to look in that little old Handbook and
see if he finds anything there that’ll give him the right to put one over
on the fellow that found you and brought you here; and the fellow that
saved his own life, too! Hand me that other branch, Pee-wee.”

Jeffrey could only stare.

“Is that cross solid gold?” he finally asked, weakly.

“Sure—14 carrots—a couple of turnips and a few potatoes. Stand out of the
way, will you?”

Jeffrey made way for Westy Martin, who was tugging a balsam branch to
Roy. Then he moved away together.

Outside the Elks’ cabin was Dory Bronson, spearing papers, for the Elks
were a tidy lot and took great pride in their surroundings.

“Is that a game?” Jeffrey asked.

“Hello, Sister Anne,” said Dory. “What’s going to be the name of your
patrol?”

“Do we have to have a name?” asked Jeffrey.

“You sure do. I was thinking ‘magpie’ would be a good one. They usually
get everything in sight.”

Jeffrey was not good at repartee; he did not understand these boys and he
could not cope with them. Much less did he understand the wholesome
spirit of rivalry and of loyalty which now made Garry an
outsider—ostracized for what the whole camp regarded as a piece of
selfishness and unfairness. His winking at Mr. Ellsworth as he walked
away with his new recruit was taken as a deliberate attempt to flaunt his
triumph.

Some said he had changed since the previous summer. There were a few who
said it was natural, perhaps, that he should have taken the strange boy
under his wing so promptly, seeing that their homes were not far apart.
But everyone agreed that by all the rules of the game Jeffrey should have
gone with Tom.

“We asked Garry to go up the hill with us that night,” said Connie
Bennet, “even though he isn’t in our troop, just because we liked him.”

“And we stopped at Edgevale and brought him along in the _Good Turn_,”
said Will Bronson, “even though we were crowded already. And now he puts
one over on us like that! _He’s_ a fine scout!”

“Only you have to say it quick to keep from choking!” added Roy, who had
stopped before the Elks cabin.

“He sure got away with it,” added Connie. “He’s got this Jeffrey, or
whatever his name is, eating out of his hand.”

“You should worry,” said Roy, as he strolled on.

The next day two men arrived in an automobile, bringing with them the
news that Jeffrey’s benefactor was dead. It cast a shadow over the camp
even among the many who had not seen the injured man. The boy himself was
greatly distressed, wringing his hands like a child, and clinging to
Garry.

One of these gentlemen was Mr. Waring’s executor, the other a friend, and
since both of them lived in Poughkeepsie, which was the nearest city to
Edgevale, neither knew much about Mr. Waring’s home life. They agreed
with Mr. Ellsworth that it would be in all ways best for this unfortunate
nephew, who seemed to be Mr. Waring’s only survivor, to remain where he
was, and accept the hospitality of the camp until his uncle’s affairs
could be settled.

“Can I stay with Garry and Raymond and be in their club and take them out
in my boat?” Jeffrey asked, excitedly; “it’s mine now, isn’t it?”

“I suppose you boys will have to settle that among yourselves,” said the
executor; “but I don’t know about the boat,” he added. “Undoubtedly it
will be yours, but you mustn’t try to run it by yourself. It would be all
right to use it if these gentlemen (turning to Mr. Ellsworth and one of
the camp trustees) will take charge of it.”

“Garry understands marine engines,” Raymond ventured timidly to the
visitors, whom the boys had just been showing about the camp.

“Gee, is he after the boat, too?” sneered Connie.

“No, he isn’t after the boat!” Raymond flared back; “and he’s got a
uniform and that’s more than _your_ patrol leader has!” he added
irrelevantly.

Garry quieted Raymond and the others laughed. No one had any resentment
against _him_, nor much against Jeffrey, for whom they made full
allowance, but Garry was ignored, and this was the unhappy sequel of his
friendship with the Bridgeboro boys and of the expedition which he had
made with three of them up the wooded hill.

It was not the policy of Jeb Rushmore nor of the scoutmasters and
trustees to seek to adjust differences between the scouts and so the
golden days (which were all too fleeting for quarrels and bad-feeling)
were clouded by this estrangement.

At last, one day, Harry Arnold took it upon himself to go to Garry’s
cabin and talk with him. He, at least, had not altogether shunned Garry
and he felt free to approach him. He found him teaching Jeffrey to carve
designs on a willow stick by artistic removal of the bark. Raymond was
making birchbark ornaments.

“Hello,” said Garry; “want to join the kindergarten class?”

“Hello, Jeff, old scout!” said Arnold, slapping him on the shoulder.
“Hello, Raymond, how’s the giant of the Hudson Highlands? I thought I’d
drop around and see if you were still alive—you stay by yourselves so
much.”

“We’re not exactly what you’d call popular,” said Garry, smiling a
little. “How’s the birthday celebration coming on?”

“Swell. I understand Slade’s own patrol is going to give him one of those
bugles that’s advertised in _Scouting_—so he can blow himself, Blakeley
says—with a fancy cord and tassels and the names of all his patrol
engraved on it. Too bad he hasn’t got a full patrol. Just one more name
and——”

“What’s the camp going to give him?” interrupted Garry.

“The camp is going to give him a wireless set.”

“Gee!”

“It’s a peach, too! Did you hear what Jeb’s going to give him? An elk’s
head—gee, you ought to see the antlers on it. He wrote to some ranch or
other away out in Montana to send it. He shot the elk himself. Roosevelt
told him it was one of the finest he ever saw.”

“He ought to know,” said Garry.

“There’s where you said something! It’ll be appropriate, hey—Elk Patrol.
And, let’s see, the Bridgeboro Troop’s going to give him a high grade
searchlight for tracking. Jeb nearly fell off his grocery box when he
heard that! He thinks you ought to go blindfold when you’re tracking.
Then there’s a lot of crazy stuff—that fellow Blakeley hasn’t had any
sleep the last week thinking up fool things. He’s going to give Tom a
cat’s collar to use for a belt.”

“That’s a good one,” laughed Raymond.

“And—oh, I don’t know what all. Pee-wee Harris is going to give him
_Boy’s Life_ for a year——”

“Next Saturday, isn’t it?” asked Garry, indifferently.

“Yes—Elks will be two years old. Blakeley was telling me their whole
history. You don’t mind if I sit down on these bricks, do you. It’s kind
of damp on the ground. Do all your own cooking here?”

“Yes, most of it. Make yourself at home.”

“Make yourself homely, as Blakeley would say,” laughed Arnold, changing
his seat.

“Suppose you fellows go and get some more willow,” said Garry. “Go ahead
with what you were saying,” he added, as Raymond and Jeffrey obediently
started off toward the lake. “I was afraid you might say something that I
wouldn’t want Jeff to hear. I have to be awful careful with him.”

“Queer duck, isn’t he!”

“Not when you know how to handle him. My father was a doctor and I’ve
often heard him tell about people like that. I think he’s got what they
call amnesia or something like that. I’ve a kind of a hunch that his—er,
this Mr. Waring took him up there in that woods so’s he could just live
quiet and natural like and maybe get better. I’ve often heard my father
talk about the woods being a medicine for the mind. Don’t you remember
there was some old duffer of a king who was cured that way—in some forest
or other? I guess Jeff’s a whole lot better than he was when he first
came up here in the woods. From little things he says sometimes, I guess
he was pretty bad at first. Ever take a flyer at carving birchbark? Look
here, what Jeff and the kid have done. They’re fiends at it.”

Arnold looked at Garry curiously.

“I want to talk to you about this Tom Slade—this patrol business.”

“I thought you did.”

“Of course, I’m kind of an outsider—it’s none of my business—except that
I happened to be the one to get your smudge signal. But, of course, I’ve
heard all about you and the Bridgeboro fellows last year—what good
friends you were and all, and how Tom Slade went up through that fire to
your shack up there, and it seems a blamed shame that you’re not good
friends now. We’re all here such a short time anyway——”

“Next Monday for us,” said Garry, ruefully.

“That’s just what I was thinking. The birthday dinner, then Sunday and
then——”

“There’ll be others here to take our places though,” finished Garry.

“And I was wondering,” continued Arnold, “if we couldn’t kind of
straighten things up before that. You know, ever since that first night
I’ve sort of hung out with the Bridgeboro fellows. Gordon and I are here
on our own hook and he sort of stands in with Pee-wee—and, oh, I don’t
know, Tom and Blakeley sort of got me. That first night when you fellows
were up the hill Blakeley spieled off a lot of stuff at campfire. He told
us all about their trip up in the motor-boat last year and about the
fellow that used to own it—how he lost his life. Funny though, how that
part of the rowboat got back to the launch, wasn’t it? I guess Tom’s
notion doesn’t amount to much, though. Anyway, that’s what ‘our beloved
scoutmaster’ as Roy calls him, seems to think.”

“Mr. Ellsworth?”

“Yes. He says Tom’s got a little vein of the dime novel in him—‘Back From
Death’ or the ‘Mystery of the Busted Dory’ as Roy says. He calls Tom
Sherlock Nobody Holmes.”

“I guess nobody understands Tom Slade very well,” said Garry.

“I suppose maybe that’s just the reason the troop makes such a lot of
him. If you played—if somebody played a mean trick on—on—Doc Carson, for
instance, the fellows wouldn’t be so sore about it. But when you put one
over on Tom you hit them all.”

“Do you think I play mean tricks?” queried Garry, beginning to carve a
willow stick.

“I didn’t say that. But you can see Tom is a favorite and anybody with
two squinters in his head, surely any scout, can see why. He came out of
the slums and he’s poor and in some ways he’s different from these
fellows. They’re all rich fellows and pretty well educated—you know what
I mean. They made him a scout, and they’re always on the watch for fear
he’ll see some difference. They’re proud of him because he’s made good
and they’re going to see to it that the scouts make good. They want him
to have all that’s coming to him just because he hasn’t got some things
that they’ve got—you understand, don’t you?”

“I think I come pretty near knowing what it is to be poor,” said Garry,
whittling.

“Well, these fellows here have been pretty decent to you, too, first and
last, haven’t they?”

“Do you think I don’t know that?”

“Do you know what I think?” said Arnold, after a pause.

“What?”

“Every fellow has some kind of a bug. Pee-wee’s bug is good turns. Doc
Carson’s bug is first-aid—honest, I believe that fellow’d give you a
black eye just for the fun of putting a bandage on it——”

Garry laughed.

“_I’m_ Gordon’s bug. Tom’s bug is that poor fellow that’s been dead two
years—and they kid the life out of him about it.”

“Do they?”

“Sure; and your bug is——”

“Break it to me gently.”

“Your bug is Raymond Hollister.”

“He’s getting to be a strong, healthy bug, don’t you think?”

“I think that’s just the reason you copped this new fellow, Jeffrey. You
wanted to please Raymond. And you let them both think that you’re a
patrol——”

Garry smiled.

“I think maybe the fact that Jeffrey lives near you——”

“It isn’t so near.”

“Well, anyway, I think maybe that has something to do with it. But I’m
going to pass you some straight talk, Everson, and I don’t want you to
get mad. You know, Slade is crazy about his patrol and by all the rules
of the game this fellow belongs with him. He’s nutty about his patrol,
whereas you haven’t really any patrol at all.”

“Do you think I don’t know that?”

“Well, then, why not let Tom have him?”

“Jeffrey isn’t a slave.”

“I know, but he’ll do anything you tell him is best for him.”

“Well, I think it’s best for him to stay right here where he is.”

Arnold rose angrily. Garry went on whittling.

“These fellows are beginning to see you in your true light, I’m afraid,”
said Arnold. “I thought maybe they were mistaken but I guess they’re not.
They’re saying now that you did Tom Slade out of the Silver Cross last
year.”

“Does Tom say that?”

“The rest of them do. Well, I don’t see as I can do much good staying
here and talking. What I came to ask you was if you didn’t think it would
be a bully idea to turn Jeffrey over to the Elks on Saturday—as a
birthday present to the patrol.” Arnold waited a moment hoping Garry
would make some reply. “Tom found him—he plowed up through that mess—Jeb
calls it nature tied in a knot—it was his idea and it was his job—and
it’s about all he could be expected to do.”

“He may have more to do.”

“What do you mean?”

“Oh, nothing in particular.”

“Well,” concluded Arnold, “it’s just a case of rendering unto Caesar the
things that are Caesar’s. What do you say?”

“What do you mean?”

“Will you fix it up with Jeffrey Waring to join the Elks?”

“No, I won’t,” said Garry.

Arnold looked steadily at him for a moment, then turned on his heel and
strode away.




                               CHAPTER IX
                        A NEW KIND OF FIRST AID


Garry sat outside the little makeshift shack which he and Jeffrey and
Raymond occupied, and whittled as Arnold strode along the beaten path
toward the main body of camp. He was still whittling when Raymond and
Jeff returned from the shore, their arms laden with willow branches.

“Kiddo,” he said to Raymond, “suppose you get me that other shirt of
yours and I’ll sew up that tear. I’ve got to fix my own, too. We’re not
very strong on clothes, are we?”

“I’ll buy us all clothes,” put in Jeffrey. “When I get my own scout suit
I’ll get new ones for you and Raymond—I’ll have thousands of dollars.”

“All right,” laughed Garry. “You put some water boiling now, while
Raymond peels the potatoes, so we can have grub. Then come over here and
talk to me while I do the family mending.”

Raymond busied himself with preparations for supper and Jeffrey sat down
on the ground close to Garry.

“I’m glad we’re here by ourselves, aren’t you?” he said, “and I’m going
to give you two thousand dollars for letting me be in your class.”

“Class?”

“I mean, patrol.”

“Now you see if you can’t remember that word _patrol_ so I don’t have to
remind you. And what was the other thing—just think.”

“About money?” asked Jeffrey, doubtfully.

“Right. Try to remember never to promise people money—especially
scouts—because they don’t like it. Now hand me that other spool of
thread.”

“But it’s fine to be rich, isn’t it?”

“It’s better to be a scout. Any headache today, Jeff?”

“No.”

“Well, now see if you can remember how many willow canes you’ve carved
altogether.”

“Eleven.”

“Right. You’re going to get the memory badge pretty soon.”

“Do they have a memory badge?”

“Now, tell me what you and I and Raymond did the day before
yesterday—just before grub.”

“Played mumbly-peg.”

“And who won?”

“You did—but I’m not going to give you a hundred dollars like I said.”

“Wasn’t it a thousand?”

“No, it was a hundred—you can’t fool me.”

“Which was it, kiddo?” Garry called to Raymond.

“A hundred,” said Raymond.

“All right. Now see if you can remember the first time you ever saw Tom
Slade.”

“That night on the hill.”

“Sure?”

“Yes.”

“And what’s going to be the name of our—class?”

“Patrol,” corrected Jeff.

“Oh yes, patrol.”

“The Tigers.”

“I tell you what—you’re getting to have a crackerjack memory.

“Now turn your face around there so I can see it by the light of the
fire. Put some more twigs on, kidlet, it’s beginning to get dark. I want
to be able to see if you’re just joshing me. This is an important matter.
When I was up at commissary shack for salt and things I was noticing the
things on the bulletin board.”

“I saw that about the Elks birthday party,” interrupted Jeffrey.

“Well, did you see that one about the new rowboat being in the lake and
asking everybody to vote on a name for it?”

“No.”

“Well, now——”

“Will we go to that dinner party?” Jeffrey interrupted.

“I’m not so sure about that,” said Garry, “but anyway, we’ll each of us
vote a name for the new boat and I’ll drop them in the ballot box up at
camp in the morning. What do you say?”

“I vote ‘Buster’!” called Raymond, who was poking up the fire.

“I vote ‘Queen’!” said Jeffrey, excitedly.

“Well, those are two punk names! ‘Queen’ isn’t so bad, but ‘Buster’
suggests busting, and a boat that would bust—go-o-dnight!”

Jeffrey stared at Garry. His face was right in the glare of the fire and
though his look was of that vacant character which all the boys had
noticed, it seemed less pronounced than it had been when he came to
Temple Camp. Perhaps the quiet, even life in the solitude under these
sheltering trees, with the tranquil lake hard by, was really showing its
effect, as Mr. Waring had evidently hoped that it would do; perhaps the
wholesome companionship of these other boys was already beginning to
tell; it was a new kind of First-Aid at all events, and one quite outside
of Doc Carson’s sphere. Or it may have been that Jeffrey was just
startled into a livelier interest, as he had often been lately, at
something that was said.

“Now,” said Garry, “I’m going to tell you my vote. And if there’s a
prize, I think I’ll win it. I vote to name the new dory—_Nymph_.”

Jeffrey’s eyes were fixed on Garry with an intense wondering stare and
Garry, looking quizzically at him, said, “Isn’t that a peach of a name?”

“It’s—it’s—somebody else thought of it—it——” Jeffrey’s utterance fizzled
out in another stare.

“And speaking of boats, how about it, Jeff, do you think you could walk
as far as Catskill Landing—seven full grown miles?”

“Sure I can! Didn’t I——”

“Well, then, by jingoes, if tomorrow’s clear, we’ll take that long
promised hike—just you and me——”

“Not Raymond?”

“Nope—just you and me; and we’ll have a squint at that wonderful boat of
yours, hey? And then I’ll show you the Bridgeboro Troop’s boat, even if
we have to trespass, and I’ll tell you all about it.”

Jeffrey grew excited at once.

“Are you—are you sure you won’t change your mind?” he demanded.

“Surest thing you know.”

“Those fellows don’t take any interest in my boat,” Jeffrey said.

“Well, I do,” said Garry, “what was the name of that game? I can’t seem
to remember it.”

“Mumbly-peg,” said Jeffrey, contemptuously.

“Well, there’s no use getting excited about it,” laughed Garry.




                               CHAPTER X
                     THE BIRTHDAY OF THE ELK PATROL


“Maybe I’m not much of a cook, but I’ll make things hot for _you_ if you
don’t get away from here!”

Roy Blakeley, from the cooking lean-to, despatched an eggplant (which had
not stood the physical test, as he said) straight at the scampering form
of Pee-wee Harris, who had raided the sacred precincts of the larder for
raisins and was now departing with scurrilous comments on his patrol
leader. And the eggplant, faithful to its trust, landed plunk upon
Pee-wee’s round, curly head.

“Plant that and raise some scrambled eggs,” Roy called after him.

Roy was assisting the camp cooks, for it was the second anniversary of
the forming of the Elk Patrol, and there were to be “doings.”

“If that kid had got a hair-cut when he ought to have, he’d have _felt_
that eggplant. That head of his is a regular shock absorber.”

“How long is a hair-cut, anyway?” queried Roy, sitting on the table and
stirring a bowl of batter.

“Never you mind them riddles,” said the chief cook. “You git that batter
ready—pour some more milk in from that pitcher.”

“Then I’ll have a batter and a pitcher both, hey?” said Roy. “Pretty soon
I’ll have a whole baseball team. But honest, this is what I mean. A boy
gets a hair-cut. Is it a hair-cut the next day? It is a hair-cut the day
after? When does it stop being a hair-cut? And here’s another thing——”

“Never you mind,” laughed the cook. “You git that stirred and then I’ll
let you make some raisin cakes—seein’ as you say you can.”

While Roy was busying himself in the cooking lean-to other scouts were
forming the three mess-boards into one long table.

At five o’clock, an hour earlier than usual, the camp bugle sounded and
patrols and troops, in formation, marched from their tents and cabins to
the long board which was heaped with such a varied and bountiful repast
as Temple Camp had never before seen. It was a pleasant scene as the boys
came with their patrol pennants waving, and took their allotted places at
the long rustic table under the trees.

Jeb Rushmore sat at the head of the table, one of the two visiting
trustees on either hand. The scoutmasters sat each with his troop, and
behind each patrol leader his staff bearing the patrol pennant was stuck
in the ground so that one could easily distinguish the different patrols.
Scouts who were visiting camp singly or in teams or small parties, like
Harry Arnold and his friend, were seated toward the foot of the board.
The three patrols of the well-organized Bridgeboro Troop, the Ravens,
Silver Foxes and Elks, sat toward the head of the table on either side,
close to the trustees. On the plate of each member of the Elk Patrol was
a strip of ribbon bearing the words neatly printed by hand “Many Happy
Returns.”

“I’ve got two here stuck together,” said Connie Bennet.

“That’s because you think you’re twice as good a scout as anyone else,”
piped up Roy. “You should worry.”

The Elks were pinning these on amid much merriment when Garry Everson and
his two companions came up the hill and took their seats near Harry
Arnold, toward the foot of the table. Whatever show of coldness and
resentment this odd trio (and particularly its leader) had borne lately,
there was none visible now, save in a certain restraint on both sides and
a lack of easy converse between Garry and those near him. Jeffrey seemed
sober and half frightened, but little Raymond’s face was wreathed in
smiles. Jeb Rushmore waved pleasantly to them from the distant end of the
long board and they acknowledged his salute.

Then the camp master drew himself together and lifted his long, lanky
form to his feet.

“I dunno’s I’m much on speechifyin’,” he said, “’n’ baout all I’m
cal’latin’ ter do is jes’ ter set ye on the trail ’n’ let ye folly it.
Onct thar come out west a gent from that thar Smithson Institution in
Wash’n’ton, ’n’ hearin’t I wuz used ter killin’ grizzlies he sez, ‘Pard,
you’re the man I want ter talk to ’baout grizzlies.’ He wuz one o’ them
zoologist fellers. ‘All I know ’baout grizzlies,’ sez I, ‘I can tell ye
in two words—_Don’t miss!_ I leave it t’the other feller ter write ’baout
’em.’ ‘An’ it’s the same here likewise—ez the feller sez. I leave it to
the others t’do th’talkin’—’cause if I try t’do it myself I’ll sure miss.
’An’ I reckon as Mr. Ellsworth is the proper one. I never stood behind
nobuddy when anythin’ wuz goin’ on—Gen’l Custer cud tell ye that—but I
reckon I’ll have ter make fer shelter naow ’n’ leave him on the firin’
line.”

He sprawled into his seat amid a very tempest of applause and cheering.

“Good old Jeb!” they called.

“Hurrah for Jeb Rushmore!”

“Bully for you, Jeb!”

He was forced to stand up three times in acknowledgement. Then Mr.
Ellsworth, scoutmaster of the First Bridgeboro Troop, arose.

“It seems,” said he, “that Mr. Rushmore has, as usual, hit the mark——”

“There’s where you said something!”

“He uses no rifle nowadays, but scouts by the dozen fall for him.
(Cheers) He may run for shelter, but he will never find any shelter from
the love and the applause and the homage which every visitor at Temple
Camp, young and old, has for him! (Great shouting.) He is a whole scout
handbook in himself. I ask every scout at this board to stand and give
three cheers for Jeb Rushmore!”

The boys were on their feet before the words were out of his mouth, and
the lusty echo swept back from the hills across the lake as if nature
herself would pay her homage to the man who knew and loved her so well.

“And while we are standing let us give three cheers for the man who
discovered Jeb Rushmore and brought him from Arizona—by the ears.
(Laughter.) You all know whom I mean—John Temple, the founder of Temple
Camp!”

When the shouting had subsided, Mr. Ellsworth continued, “Scouts, we are
not joining in this celebration to make a hero of any of our number.
There is but one hero at Temple Camp. He sits at the head of the table.
(Applause.) And if it were not for one fact I think I should have vetoed
this merrymaking and the Bridgeboro Troop would have had its celebration
by itself and not have obtruded its family joys upon others.

“We are here, scouts, to celebrate the second anniversary of the Elk
Patrol of which Tom Slade is the leader—and organizer. It is not because
Tom is a scout, but because he is a _scout-maker_, that we wish to honor
him, and his all but completed patrol. And that is what I want every
scout here to know and to take back with you to the several parts of the
country from which you come. It is not enough to be a scout—one must be a
_scout-maker_. He must reach out to the right and to the left—into the
highways and byways—and muster his recruits. That is the only way that
our great army—or rather, our great brotherhood—can grow. Do you get me?”

“We get you,” they answered, laughing at his use of the slang which he
was so ready to learn from them.

“Tom Slade holds the gold cross for an act of great bravery here last
summer. He holds seven merit badges and is about to win two more. On the
first night of his arrival here this summer, he had the spunk and the
courage and persistence to choose a little party and lead them——”

Cheer upon cheer drowned his words. Tom himself sat, stolid as usual, but
smiling in embarrassment as scout after scout, clustering about him,
slapped him on the shoulder. A few noticed that Garry smiled and
applauded, but kept to his seat.

“Hurrah for Tom Slade!” they called again and again.

Mr. Ellsworth with difficulty continued, “And to lead them up into that
wilderness over yonder, because he could not sit down, tired and travel
worn as he was, while some one lay dying.

“Just a minute, scouts—listen and I will be through. These things are all
to his credit—to the credit of his patrol, of his troop, of the whole
scout family, here in this beloved land of ours. But when I think of Tom
Slade—as I often do,” he added, smiling, oh, so pleasantly, at Tom; “I
think not only of how he raised himself out of dirt and mischief to this
noble level where you see him, but of how he went back into the byways
and found these boys who now form his splendid patrol. _I_ tried to get
Connie Bennet and failed. (Laughter.) _I_ made a stab for the celebrated
Bronson twins—nothing doing. They were too busy ringing other people’s
doorbells. (Laughter.) I made a grandstand play for others, but was
turned down hard. Why? Because it takes a boy to recruit a boy. So all of
you scouts pack that little fact down in the corner of your duffel bags
and take it home with you. If every scout secured a scout, where there
are ten thousand now there would be twenty thousand, and where there are
five hundred thousand, there would be a million! I ask every scout here
to stand up and as he gives three cheers for Tom Slade, scout-maker, to
resolve that he will make at least one scout before he comes here another
summer. And now three cheers for the Elk Patrol on its second birthday,
and three cheers for Tom Slade, and three cheers for the eighth
scout—whoever and wherever he may be—who before another summer shall make
the Elk Patrol complete as well as honored!”

Back across the still bosom of Black Lake, again and again, the cheers
reverberated, drowning the closing words of Mr. Ellsworth’s speech.
Pee-wee Harris, standing on the seat, waved his scarf and shouted himself
hoarse. Roy, with the announcement megaphone, called, “Oh, you Tomasso!”
Raymond Hollister clapped his hands.

“Spooch, spooch—speak a spooch!” called Roy.

Tom, with his face scarlet, shook his head as Mr. Ellsworth looked at him
and the scoutmaster held up a staying hand in sympathy with his
embarrassment. “He says he’d rather eat,” he said.

“Three cheers for the eats!” shouted Roy, irrepressibly.

“The eats” after being uproariously cheered, were forthwith assailed
until there was nothing left of them, and all agreed that the meal beat
the regulation Temple Camp Sunday dinner twenty ways. And that was saying
a good deal.

“And now,” said Mr. Ellsworth, “since this celebration originated in the
fertile brain of the renowned leader of the Silver Foxes——”

“Wait, give them a chance to cheer me,” interrupted Roy.

“I think it is my duty to put the balance of our program into his able
hands.”

“Excuse me while I blush,” said Roy.

“There are, I believe, a few remembrances and these it shall be his
pleasure to bring forward. I present to you,” he added, smiling, “the
most silvery fox of them all, Roy Blakeley.”

“Why pick on me?” said Roy. “I thought I was going to be the buttered
toast master, but it seems I’m to be the souvenir slinger. I should
worry. I go where duty calls, and I wouldn’t run after any job—especially
if it’s a good runner.

“Scouts and sprouts,” he continued, with a sly glance at Pee-wee; “now
you’re supposed to say, ‘Hear, hear!’”

“Hear, hear!” they called, laughingly.

“I thank you. There are several things for the Honorable Tomasso Slade,
otherwise known as Thomas the Silent, or Sherlock Nobody Holmes of
Bridgeboro, N. G. Tomasso Slade is a home-made scout—I mean a _self_-made
scout—and he’s made so as he can’t smile.” (He was beginning to smile
however.) “The first present is from his boyhood’s friend, Roy Blakeley
(that’s me) and it is intended to make him laugh.”

He handed across the table a turkey feather with a bow of ribbon tied
about it. “And this,” he added, lifting the huge elk’s head to the board
and smiling at Tom’s surprise, “is from Mr. Rushmore; its history, by Mr.
Rushmore himself, is writ, wrot, wrote—on that piece of paper tied to the
horns.”

Tom lifted the panel with the noble head and magnificent antlers and as
the boys crowded about him he could only look toward Jeb with his eyes
swimming.

“That’s all right, Tommy,” smiled Jeb, as pleased as Tom himself.

The cat’s collar belt was handed over amid much laughter, and various
other small tokens, some humorous and all of a kind easily made or
procurable in the woodland community. The wireless set almost knocked Tom
off his feet, and when it was followed by the bugle with the Elk patrol
names engraved upon it, he was overwhelmed.

  Thomas Slade
  William Bronson
  Theodore Bronson
  Connover Bennet
  George O’Connor
  Charles O’Connor
  Wade Van Ester

He blinked as he gazed at the highly polished metal, at the names which
had meant labor and long effort for him, and which bespoke his success.
His hand almost shook as he fumbled the silken tassel of the beautiful
instrument, and the familiar names upon it seemed like fifty names
wrought into an intricate design.

“That’s all right, Tom,” said Mr. Ellsworth, smiling and placing a
reassuring hand on his shoulder. “They understand.”

But it was Roy who came to his rescue, as he had done more than once
before, and saved him further embarrassment.

“Blow it, Tomasso,” said he. “Maybe you can blow up your other recruit if
you blow loud enough.”

“Sure, maybe it’ll be like the shot heard round the world,” said Pee-wee.

“Or like the music of old Ichabod Crane, which they say is still heard in
Sleepy Hollow,” said Mr. Ellsworth. “Perhaps it will be heard months
hence.”

“Blow for him, anyway,” said Roy. “He’ll come some day, you can bet, and
we’ll all wish it at the same time, while you’re blowing, Tom. Go ahead!”

Tom raised the bugle to his lips laughing, and as he blew lustily the
echo of its attenuated final note was borne back with the freshening
night breeze, like a faint answer from the encompassing hills.

“He is here,” said an impassive voice.

They all stood staring, the scouts still at their places and those
clustered about Tom, and saw Garry Everson standing in his place in the
characteristic attitude which was familiar to them all, one hand on his
hip, the other in his pocket.

As they stared at him, Jeffrey Waring, gulping nervously, rose from his
seat and stood beside him for a second. Then, at Garry’s nod, he moved
around to Tom’s side.

“Tell him your name,” said Garry, smiling, “They’ll want it for the
bugle, you know.”

“My name is Harry Stanton,” he said, hesitatingly, but seriously.

“And you fellows,” said Garry quietly, “had better take him home to his
mother and father before you make any other plans. I’m not going to do
_your_ work for you. I’ve done my part. It’s for you to take him back.
May I look at that bugle?”

But Tom did not hand him the bugle. He stood rooted to where he stood,
staring like an idiot.

Some one stooped and picked up the bugle which had fallen to the ground.




                               CHAPTER XI
                   GARRY’S STORY AND HARRY STANTON’S


It was around the glowing camp fire on that memorable night that the
wondering boys heard Garry Everson’s simple, unboastful tale of the new
kind of first-aid which had helped him to solve the mystery of Jeffrey
Waring and put Tom Slade in the way of realizing his fondest dream—that
of returning Harry Stanton to his young sister and his home.

“If we looked like beans, I’d say you were trying to string us,” observed
Roy, as he sat in his familiar posture near the fire, his knees drawn up
and his hands clasped about them. “It beats anything _I_ ever heard. Our
beloved scoutmaster will have to go away, way back and sit down.”

Mr. Ellsworth, still half incredulous, shook his head. “The pity of it
is,” said he, “that there’s no merit badge for this kind of first-aid.
There can be no doubt of the truth of this thing, I suppose?” he added.

Garry laughed good-naturedly. “I wish I could be as sure of his having
the boat for his own—now that he’s somebody else. It’s one peacherino.”

“And you suspected that first night, you say?”

“Well, no—not exactly. You fellows have got to remember that my father
was an alienist, if you know what that is, and I’ve heard him tell about
just such troubles as Harry’s. So I don’t deserve much credit. Only I had
to be very careful. You can see yourselves it wasn’t a case for bandages
and splints and things.”

“It would be pretty hard to give you too much credit,” Doc Carson said.

“The first thing I noticed,” Garry went on, “was the way Tom stared when
he first saw him that night up in the woods. He was sure he’d seen him
before. I didn’t think much about that though till afterwards when other
little things set me thinking and then I remembered about it and I began
to put two and two together. When Jeffrey told me where he belonged I
remembered about the old gentleman in Vale Centre who came home one time
with a young fellow he called his nephew and how all the people in the
village wondered who the nephew was. They didn’t live near enough for me
to know much about them and I don’t know as I ever saw Jeffrey until that
night up on the mountain.

“Well, it was while we were bringing Mr. Waring down through the woods on
the stretcher that Tom said something about the Stantons—he just
mentioned the name sort of off-hand, and I noticed that Jeffrey stared at
him and looked sort of worried or puzzled, kind of, and then started in
again chattering in that way of his.

“Then it came jumping into my head all of a sudden that he was trying to
think of something and couldn’t. And I was wondering if Tom really ever
had seen him before, when I just happened to think—the idea came to me,
sort of—that maybe it was his sister that Tom had seen. Of course, I
didn’t think so but the idea wouldn’t go away and I decided that anyway
I’d keep Jeffrey near me if I could and not let him get mixed up with the
crowd where he’d be all the time getting excited, and see if I couldn’t
find out something about him. And even as it was, that was some tall job,
believe me.”

“You certainly kept by yourselves,” some one said.

“I knew the time was short and I wanted to see if maybe he wouldn’t get
better by just being quiet. I knew a person could get to be—sort
of—flighty, like, from an accident or something like that, and lose his
memory, and be like a kid, and that sometimes, if he lives quiet and
don’t get excited or see many people, he’ll begin to remember things——”

“Garry, we’ve got to hand it to you,” said Roy, earnestly. “You’ve spent
your whole vacation buried alive.”

“Even still I didn’t exactly think he was Harry Stanton,” Garry went on,
“but after, a while, just for experiment, kind of, I began springing
words on him that I thought he might remember. I sprung _Stanton_ and
_Nyack_ but there wasn’t any come-back until one day—it was the day
Arnold dropped in to see me—I sprung the word _Nymph_ as a good name for
a boat and that seemed to kind of hit him. He just stared and stared and
stared. After that I decided to take him down to Catskill Landing to look
at that sumptuous yacht of his and then to show him the _Good Turn_. I
knew that sometimes when a person sees the thing that caused his trouble
or goes back to the same place, maybe, or something of that sort, his
memory comes back to him all of a sudden and he wakes up as if he’d been
dreaming, as you might say. There’s a long name they have for it, but I
can’t seem to remember it. Anyway, it’s a blamed funny thing, but it’s
true. If you want to know what happened when we trespassed on the _Good
Turn_, you’d better let _him_ tell you, hey, Jeff?”

The boy who had been the subject of Garry’s simple narrative was smiling,
as every one turned toward him, and though the familiar trace of
childishness was not entirely gone from his smile, there was a suggestion
of mental poise or self-possession, even in the face of this public
stare, which had not been there before. And though one or two noticed
(for they were scouts and noticed things) that he twirled one finger
nervously with his other hand, he at least did not begin to chatter with
that distressing agitation and irrational boastfulness which the camp had
known so well.

He had not changed his habit and demeanor as a lightning change performer
will doff his costume, but there was a difference and everyone could see
it. The woods and the quiet water and the sympathetic surroundings were
to do much for him yet and it would be a long journey back to mental
keenness and physical vigor. But he was different, and it seemed all very
wonderful. It was a knockout blow to Doc Carson, proficient though he was
in his chosen specialty, for not a word about this kind of business had
he ever seen in his study of First-Aid.

“Hey, Stanton, you old Jekyll and Hyde,” Garry repeated, cheerily; “you
came near getting me in Dutch with this bunch. Tell them about the
_Nymph_.”

Harry Stanton smiled naturally and now Tom Slade, who was watching his
every movement, realized how much like his young sister he looked. His
nose wrinkled a little, just like hers, when he smiled. There was no
doubt as to who he was.

“I knew it was my boat,” he said. “I thought it was the next morning. It
seemed as if I was just waking up. I don’t mean it’s my boat, now, of
course——”

“It sure is yours, all right,” said Roy.

“I’ve got my other one and I don’t want it. But it seemed as if I had
fallen asleep on it and——”

“He thought I was Benty Willis for a minute,” said Garry.

“And then—then, sort of, I knew all about what happened. When I saw
my—the—boat, I knew. I knew for sure.”

There were a few seconds of silence, broken by Mr. Ellsworth’s saying,
“It’s wonderful, almost unbelievable.” And still no one else spoke, the
company only gazing at Harry Stanton, as one might look at an apparition.

Then Doc Carson, Raven and First-Aid Scout, said, “Garry, you’re a
wonder.”

“And all the thanks he got——” began Connie Bennet.

“Oh, I didn’t mind that,” laughed Garry; “I had my little trail to
follow, and I followed it, that’s all. I just kept my eyes on the trail
and not on you fellows—just as Jeb is all the time telling us. If he had
seen that boat too soon, or been jollied or got too much excited or tired
he might have gone nutty, for sure. Tell us a camp-fire yarn, Roy, I want
Harry to see that we’ve got a real ‘nut’ in the camp.”

But Roy told no yarn, and still they were all silent. After a while, Tom
spoke.

“I don’t want to make you talk about it, if you don’t feel like it,” he
said, “or if you don’t remember, but I always thought that maybe you were
alive because a board belonging to your launch’s skiff was in the launch
when we got her.”

Garry laughed. “Tell him how it happened, Stanton,” said he.

“I remember all about it,” said Harry. “I was in the launch and Benty was
in the tender, bailing it out. There was a long rope from the tender to
the _Nymph_. He was singing and I was sitting in the cabin talking to
him. We had a light on the launch. That’s the same way as I told it to
you—isn’t it?” he questioned, turning to Garry.

“Sure—go on.”

“Then I heard a speed-boat coming—down?”

“That’s what you said,” Garry encouraged.

“Maybe it was up. Anyway I called, but I suppose they couldn’t hear me on
account of their exhaust.”

“You see,” said Garry. “He wanted to warn them about the small boat which
was about thirty feet away and had no light.”

“They crashed into it and Benty yelled that he was hurt and said he had
hold of the rope. And then—and then—” Stanton broke off, looking
frightened and perplexed, and rubbed his hands together distressingly.

“You let me finish it for you and see if I don’t get it right,” said
Garry, soothingly. “Jeff pulled the rope so as to save Benty, who
couldn’t swim very well. But Benty must have let go. That right, Jeff?”

“Yes, and—”

“Now wait a minute.” Garry looked across the fire at Tom. “And all there
was at the end of the rope was a board from the skiff. The skiff must
have been all smashed to pieces. It was the board that had the ring in it
that the boat was tied to——”

“Yes?” said Tom.

“Well, that’s all there is to it. Stanton pulled it aboard thinking his
friend was clinging to it. And when he saw how it was he dived for him——”

“I dived right away,” interrupted Harry Stanton, shuddering, “and I swam
all around and I called—I swam way out and then there was a big light
that dazzled me——”

“And that’s all,” concluded Garry. “He can’t tell you any more because he
doesn’t remember any more till he was in Mr. Waring’s house. We’re going
to try to find out about it, aren’t we. Stan?”

He moved closer to the boy and put his arm about his shoulder with a
significant look at the others as if to ask them not to question him
further.

“And he wants us all to go down to Nyack with him in his own boat which
has the other one beat forty-’leven ways. He says he wouldn’t ride in
that old tub now, hey, Stan? And you can keep it or sink it just as you
please. And when we get to Nyack he wants a committee of three scouts to
go home with him while the rest of us stay on the boat. And after that,
if we can fix it up, we’re all going to take a cruise up the river and
through the lakes for a little call on Uncle Sam at Plattsburg. Hey,
Stan?”

“And the three scouts that he wants to go up home with him (he’s very
particular about it) are Tom Slade and Roy and Pee-wee Harris, because
they’re the ones who were there last year and they know his sister, so
it’s up to them to take him back.”

“How about you?” Roy promptly demanded.

“Oh, I’m out of it,” said Garry.

Then, suddenly, such a shout as might have raised the dead resounded. It
was Pee-wee Harris, flying off the handle, as he realized the meaning of
Garry’s proposal.

“Oh, crinkums, won’t it be great!” he shouted. “And—and—I’ll think up a
little kind of a speech to make to her—gee, it’s just like a story,
with—with—yachts and long lost brothers and things——”

“Especially things,” said Roy.




                              CHAPTER XII
                           PEE-WEE TRIUMPHANT


It was toward the close of a beautiful summer afternoon that a trim
Racine cruiser poked her nose around the boat club’s anchorage near Nyack
on the Hudson, and brought up alongside one of the commercial wharves,
which made an inharmonious background to the spotless white hull and
shining mahogany cabin. She made no more noise than a canoe. The first
rays of the declining sun fell upon her knife-like brass bow and
reflected from her shining metal parts. As she touched the dock several
scouts scrambled from her and made her fast.

“Jimin-_ety_! But she gets over the water!” remarked Connie Bennet. “We’d
have been a couple of days or more coming down in the _Good Turn_.”

“And doesn’t she take the hills fine!” said Roy Blakeley.

“She’s a _regular_ boat,” observed Garry.

“The _Good Turn_ is all right only her bow’s too near the stern,” said
Roy.

“Gee, everything looks the same, doesn’t it,” said Pee-wee, gazing about
him. “This is just where we stood when it began to rain last year. Then
we went up that road and that’s where we found the _Good Turn_.”

“The sun was going down just as it is now,” said Tom, climbing out over
the combing. “I remember those hills over there looked just like they do
now.”

“Sure, even the water’s wet, just the same as it was then. Don’t you
remember how I spoke about the water being so wet?”

“This is just like a book,” said Pee-wee. “Gee, I never thought it would
happen this way; I saw a movie play once where a feller—a long lost
brother—came home, and oh, cracky, they fell all over him. They thought
he was dead and his mother she was looking at his picture and crying—I
mean weeping—when all of a sudden——”

“All of a sudden Pee-wee Harris will be left behind if he doesn’t get a
hustle,” said Roy. “Come on, wash up and get your hair fixed if you
expect to make that speech.”

“Do you know how I’m going to begin?”

“I know how you’re going to end, if you don’t get a hustle.”

The whole Bridgeboro troop with Garry and Raymond and Harry Stanton, had
come down from Catskill Landing. Their stay at Temple Camp was ended and
they had said good-bye to Harry Arnold and his young friend, whom they
hoped to meet again next summer. Little they dreamed of the strange
circumstances under which that meeting was to occur. They had left the
_Good Turn_ up the river for they hoped to cruise northward again in the
larger boat.

In the cool of the evening the three scouts who had trod this same road a
year before, accompanied by the boy who had trod it many times himself in
days gone by, made their way through the beautiful hilly country for West
Nyack. And, indeed, their errand seemed, as Pee-wee had suggested, like a
chapter out of a book.

Garry had positively refused to go with them.

“It was you fellows that she gave the boat to and it’s for you to pay her
back,” he had said.

“Do you remember how old—how Mr. Stanton laughed when I talked to him?”
said Pee-wee as they tramped along the familiar road. “You can’t deny
that I put it into his head to give us the boat. And I bet if I ask him
to let Harry go on a cruise now, he’ll do it. You leave it to me—I know
how to handle him.”

“All right, kiddo, we’ll leave it to you,” laughed Roy, “but I’ve got a
sneaking idea that when they once get their fists on our long lost son
and brother it’ll take a crow-bar to pry him loose again.”

“You leave it to me.”

It would be hard to say what Harry Stanton’s feelings were as he walked
homeward with his three companions. He seemed nervous and anxious and
said but little, but every object which met his gaze now was familiar to
him and as he looked about upon the very fields where he had played and
the houses which he knew he seemed to acquire poise and self-possession.
An odd habit which he had shown to Garry and somewhat to the others of
confusing his life at Mr. Waring’s with his old life at home, was fast
disappearing and now each familiar sight seemed to act like a potent
medicine to bring him to himself.

A man who passed them on the road turned and stared at him, then went on,
turning again and again. He spoke to a man who was raking a lawn and who
also stared after him. The boys paid no heed.

At last they reached the house. No one was about, and they took a short
cut across the lawn, right under the big tree where Pee-wee had captured
the fugitive bird. Here was a garden bench and leaving Harry Stanton
seated upon it, they went up on the porch and rang the bell. Pee-wee was
visibly nervous and even Roy showed repressed excitement, but Tom was
stolid as he always was.

There was the calling of a voice within, the faint sound of footsteps on
the stair, and young Ruth Stanton stood on the inner side of the screen
door looking at them. For a moment she stared in amazement and in that
momentary look Tom caught a glint of the same expression that had puzzled
him in Jeffrey Waring in their first encounter on the lonely hill. Then
suddenly her face lighted up with a merry smile of recognition.

“Oh, hello,” she said, opening the door and speaking in great surprise.
“I didn’t know you——”

“You remember us?” laughed Roy.

“I should think I did, but you’re the last persons I ever expected to
see. Isn’t it lovely, your coming again—just as if you had dropped from
the clouds!”

“We’d have been some shower, wouldn’t we?” laughed Roy.

“Oh, I think it’s fine,” she repeated; “and you’ve got to stay to supper.
We’re going to have popovers—do you like popovers? I adore them!”

“We don’t know what they are,” said Roy, “but we like them.”

They sat down in the wicker chairs which formed a little circle on the
deep, shaded porch, the girl swinging her feet back and forth and gazing
from one to the other.

“We’ve been up to camp,” Tom began. “We’re on our way down the river.”

“Oh, isn’t that lovely—I wish I was a boy! How’s the boat?”

“Gee, it _is_ great being a boy,” said Pee-wee. “I—”

“The boat is in the best of health, thank you,” interrupted Roy, fearing
that Pee-wee would say too much; “and one of the reasons we hiked up here
is because we want to pay you back for it. As Pee-wee says, a scout has
to be cautious and he didn’t want us to pay you back till we were sure
the boat was all right.”

“I never said that!” cried Pee-wee, indignantly. “Don’t you believe him,
I never said that!”

“So we’ve been a long time getting around to it,” continued Roy.

“That’s ridiculous,” said the girl. “I thought you just came to _see_
me.”

“So we did,” said Roy.

“And we’re going to tell you our adventures since we saw you,” added
Pee-wee. “We’ve had some dandy ones. One in particular that you’ll like
to hear about,” he added, with an air of mystery.

“When anybody does anything for a scout,” Tom began again in his sober
way, “he has to remember it and do them a good turn. We couldn’t do you
one because we couldn’t think of anything big enough——”

“You see, I’ll tell you how it is,” interrupted Pee-wee, “each good
turn’s got to be better than the other one—they get bigger—kind of,
and——”

“That’s nonsense,” said Ruth. “Then I’d have to do you a bigger one to
pay back and you’d have to—”

“We think we’ve hit on a pretty good one,” said Roy. “Anyway, how’s the
bird?”

“Oh, he’s fine! He can say ‘Good-night’ and ‘Welcome, home’!”

“That’s a good thing to say just now,” Roy said.

“And I’m teaching him to say ‘Down with the Kaiser’! Isn’t that perfectly
terrible! Anyway, I’m not neutral. Are you?”

“Not so you’d notice it,” Roy confessed.

“Would you go to war if we had a war?” she asked impulsively.

“Oh, I guess we’d give old Uncle Samuel a hand.”

“Isn’t that glorious! But suppose you should get killed.”

“We’re not supposing things now,” said Roy. “We’ve got something to tell
you. We came back to bring you a present. When people come across with
boats and things like that we don’t let them get away with it—hey, Tom?
So we’re here with our little come-back. What d’ye say we stroll down on
the lawn? We left our package on that bench out there; and just for the
fun of it we’d like to poke around where Pee-wee pulled his stunt last
summer. Then well go in and hear the parrot say ‘Welcome home’—what d’ye
say?”

“Yes, but you’ve got to stay to supper, so that you can see papa,” Ruth
said. “He laughs whenever he thinks of how you called him Old Man
Stanton. But he isn’t grouchy—only he’ll never be the same since my
brother—died. And besides, you have to tell me your adventures, you
know.”

They went down the steps and crossed the lawn. The girl, running ahead,
seemed not to notice the lone figure on the bench with its back toward
her till she was within a few feet of it. Then she paused in surprise and
as she did so, Harry Stanton rose and turned to face her, the while
grasping the back of the bench nervously....

The several accounts of the three scouts as to what happened then,
differed materially. There was no doubt that Ruth stepped quickly back in
momentary fright, grasping the arm of Pee-wee who happened to be nearest
her. Pee-wee said that her hand was trembling and that she “clutched him
in terror.” Roy maintained that the “clutching in terror business” came
out of a heroic scene from one of Alger’s books. Tom said that for a
moment she seemed about to run, which Pee-wee admitted, claiming that she
thought better of it when she found that he was near. All agreed that she
was first panic-stricken and then greatly agitated as Roy took her hand
and drew her to the bench.

At all events, it was only for a moment or two and then she and her
brother were in each other’s arms. There is no authentic account of what
happened then, for the three visitors, being good scouts, strolled to the
hedge which bordered the lawn and looked at the scenery beyond. It must
have been beautiful scenery and very affecting, for Pee-wee’s eyes were
brimming, and Tom’s and Roy’s were not exactly what you would call
dry....




                              CHAPTER XIII
                            AT THE STANTONS’


The return of Harry Stanton to his home was a nine days’ wonder in the
village. Poor Mrs. Stanton seemed almost unable to comprehend the
wonderful reality of his actual presence and she kept him by her
constantly, even to the point of accompanying him back and forth from the
river. The boys noted these affectionate attentions with dismay, for they
wished to make a cruise in the beautiful boat, with its proud owner as
their companion.

“You leave it to me,” said Pee-wee. “I know how to handle mothers; we’ve
got to wait for the something or otherological moment.”

The days which followed were days of stress but of happiness to all
concerned. Mr. Stanton lost no time in going to Poughkeepsie where he got
all the information that could be obtained from Mr. Waring’s executor and
friends as to how the eccentric but kindly old gentleman came into
possession of the so-called nephew on whom he had showered wealth and
sympathetic attention.

Because he _had_ been eccentric, his intimates knew but little of his
affairs, but the facts, as Mr. Stanton was able to piece them together,
were that Mr. Waring had lost his wife and only son and that he had never
been the same afterward. He lived the life of a recluse in his lonely,
luxurious home. Two years before he had started up the Hudson in his
beautiful boat, accompanied by a valet and a man to run the craft,
intending to visit some remote spot where he had enjoyed the trout
fishing in his early years.

All that his business friends knew in addition to this was that he had
returned almost immediately, bringing with him an apparently weak-minded
boy whom he called his nephew and whose self-appointed guardian and
benefactor he became.

Mr. Stanton tried to find the two men who had accompanied their employer
on that mysterious cruise. The valet had died, but he located the other
man working in a munitions plant not far from Poughkeepsie. From this
man, who spoke only broken English, he learned something of his son’s
rescue.

While cruising upstream at night, he said, they had heard a cry from the
water and throwing the searchlight about had located a drowning person,
whom they pulled aboard. It was a boy, the man said, whose head had been
frightfully injured, the skull being cracked, as was discernible through
his plastered, soaking hair. He was bruised in several other places and
lost consciousness as soon as they got him aboard the launch.

They had turned the boat at once and returned home, where the victim,
still unconscious, was attended by “great doctors.” The man had not lived
at Mr. Waring’s house and he knew very little more except what he had
heard indirectly. The boy jabbered, he said, and did not know who he was
and talked nonsense. Then he had heard that an operation was performed,
that the edges of the broken skull were lifted up into place, and that
the boy was better but “nutty.” He had later heard a rumor that the boy
was dead. That was all he knew.

Mr. Stanton had had no difficulty in locating James, the chauffeur, whom
Jeffrey Waring had mentioned in connection with his pigeons, and from him
he had received a more coherent account of Mr. Waring’s second cruise,
which was destined to have a fatal sequel for himself and momentous
consequences for his ward.

James had, he said, entered Mr. Waring’s employ the year before and found
the old gentleman’s nephew to be a “queer lad” who, he understood, had
once had a dreadful accident of some sort. He got excited easily, the man
said, and at such times said the most extravagant things. He had pigeons
and dogs and lived an odd sort of life by himself.

In the early part of the summer Mr. Waring had again planned a trip to
his favorite fishing retreat, believing that the quiet and remoteness of
the place would help the boy, who was already greatly improved. The
doctors, so the man said, had recommended the camping trip.

They had made an uneventful but pleasant trip up the river in the
_Rambler_ and after they had moored her near Catskill Landing Mr. Waring
had sent James back to Vale Centre to attend to his regular duties there.

That was all that Mr. Stanton could learn and he returned home somewhat
puzzled as to whether Mr. Waring had ever tried to locate Harry’s people,
or whether he intended to do so when the boy should have regained his
health and mental poise. He had lavished wealth and kindness on the
stricken lad, that was certain; the last days of his life had been spent
in a sojourn to a remote spot dear to his own memory in the hope that it
might hasten the boy’s recovery; and the Stantons could not think
otherwise of him than as one, peculiar indeed, but of the purest motive
and overflowing with kindness. Nor did they ever learn exactly what had
happened to Harry while in the water, though they held to the belief that
he had been injured by the paddlewheel of some steamer.

That Garry Everson, scout, had completed the work which the old gentleman
had begun was now realized by all and with it the boys realized the quiet
patience with which he had borne their coldness and even their taunts.

“He’s a real hero,” said Pee-wee.

“All others are imitations,” agreed Roy.

During Mr. Stanton’s absence, Mr. Ellsworth had made a flying trip to
Bridgeboro to arrange for the troop’s absence for another week or two,
and meanwhile the scouts camped on the boat, spending much of their time
at the Stanton place, where they played tennis and basket-ball and taught
the parrot to say “I’m a scout,” and “Poor Pee-wee.”

Those were days of great delight to Ruth Stanton. In contemptuous
defiance of Pee-wee’s proud assertion that “boys could do things that
girls couldn’t do” she beat him again and again at tennis, and beat the
rest of them, too, for she was an old hand at the game.

For the first time, too, her brother showed his interest and skill in
outdoor games; his fondness for tennis seemed to come back on him in a
rush, and though he sometimes got rattled and did not think quickly
enough, his playing was rapid and accurate in the main and he and Ruth
came out first in the tournament in which they all joined.

“And wait till you see Harry swim!” she said proudly, as, racket in hand,
she sank onto a garden bench; “he can swim across the river and back; do
you know how far that is?”

“I know how far it is over; I don’t know how far it is back,” said Roy.

“You think you’re smart, don’t you!”

“I’ll give you a correct imitation of a boy scout raising a racket,” Roy
said, holding his racket high in the air. “Next imitation, that of a boy
scout following a trail,” he added, going on his hands and knees and with
an absurd air of scrutiny and stealth following the chalk mark around the
tennis court.

“Isn’t he too silly!” laughed Ruth.

Roy resumed his seat beside her. “Did you hear about the Germans
bombarding a man’s garden and shelling all his peas?”

“Really—” began Ruth. “Oh, nonsense, it’s a joke!”

“Why is a boy scout?” he persisted.

“What’s the answer?”

“There isn’t any. Here’s another. What’s the aim of a scout?”

“Well?”

“A correct aim. Did you hear about the scout that went camping without
any duffel bag or baggage, yet he carried fifteen good-sized articles in
his back pocket?”

“He couldn’t! How could he?”

“He had a copy of _Boys’ Life_ with fifteen articles in it. Which has the
most stories, _Boy’s Life_ or the Mutual Life? Here’s another. If _Every
Boys’ Library_ caught fire, how would the smoke come out?”

“Silly!”

“In volumes, of course. Say, if it’s cowardly to strike a person who is
on the ground, is it all right to hit the trail? Here’s another——”

“You seem to know so much about them,” Ruth interrupted. “Tell me what an
Honor Scout is?”

“Is it a riddle?”

“No, it isn’t a riddle; I really want to know.”

“An Honor Scout is a scout that has a sense of honor. There’s only one
scout in our troop that has any sense of honor—that’s Honorable Tomasso
Slade alias Sherlock Nobody Holmes. He has the gold cross. Honorable
Garry Everson has the silver cross. That means he has some sense of
honor, but not so much.”

“I don’t believe a word you’re telling me,” she said.

Roy looked at her through the strings of his racket. “Boy Scout behind
prison bars,” said he, teasingly.

“_You_ tell me,” she said, turning to Doc Carson.

“_I’ll_ tell you,” said Pee-wee; “you’ve got to look out for him, he’s a
jollier. An Honor Scout is one that has saved somebody’s life—and gets an
honor medal—see? If he takes a big chance and—and—kind of plunges into
the jaws of death—kind of—”

“How?” said Roy.

“Then he gets the gold cross. If he—”

“Lands just outside the jaws,” interrupted Roy.

“Shut up!” said Pee-wee. “If he doesn’t take quite such a big chance but
a _pretty_ big one, then he gets the silver cross. And if he takes a
small chance—”

“About the size of Pee-wee,” Roy put in.

“Then he gets the bronze cross,” Pee-wee finished. “See?”

They were lolling on and about the bench near the tennis court, laughing
at each other’s nonsense, when Harry Stanton jumped up suddenly. Garry
and Ruth watched him keenly, as they always did when he became excited.

“Oh, I’ve got an idea, a fine idea!” he cried. “I got it from what
Pee-wee said——”

“All right, take your time, Stan,” said Garry.

“I tried to think of a name—a new name—for the _Rambler_ but I couldn’t
think of any. I told my mother I’d name it for Tom Slade only that
wouldn’t be fair to Garry, and it would be the same if I named it for
Garry—see? Anyway—anyway—she said a boy’s name wouldn’t be good, anyway.
But if I name it _Honor Scout_, it will be naming it for both of
them—won’t it?” he asked anxiously.

“Oh, crinkums, you hit it!” shouted Pee-wee, enthusiastically. “It’s an
insulation—”

“Inspiration, you mean,” corrected Connie.

“What’s the difference?” demanded Pee-wee.

“Nothing—only insulation is the covering around a wire and inspiration is
a good idea.”

“Otherwise they’re the same,” said Roy.

“Oh, it’s one peach of a name!” repeated Pee-wee, undaunted, and pounding
the back of the bench. “It’s a piperino!”

Harry Stanton was delighted.

“It _is_ a bully name,” said Westy Martin.

“And—and _I_ thought of it—didn’t I,” said Harry, with the touch of
childishness that still showed itself at times.

“You sure did,” said Garry.

“It’s sort of two names in one,” said Will Bronson.

“I—I thought of it just this minute,” repeated Harry, nervously.

“You’re all right, Stan,” said Garry. “Sit down and watch the game
now—watch your sister trim Roy.”

“I wouldn’t play with him, he’s too silly,” said Ruth.

“You’re afraid of being beaten,” challenged Roy.

“By _you_? You don’t even know how to volley.”

“I know how to jolly,” Roy came back.

They played much to Harry’s amusement, which was just what Garry wanted,
and Roy was ignominiously vanquished.

“Now you’re supposed to say ‘Deuce’!” Ruth called to him.

“I don’t use such language,” answered Roy.

“Bat it over there, silly, and then say ‘My advantage!’”

“I wouldn’t take advantage of a girl,” he answered.

It was no wonder he was beaten.

Roy and one or two of the others stayed for supper and Ruth took him into
the kitchen (to the consternation of her mother and the colored cook) and
taught him to make popovers. Being the troop’s chef, he was greatly
interested and wore a huge kitchen apron on which he was continually
tripping.

Upon Mr. Stanton’s return a slight cloud was cast upon the rosy plans for
a cruise, partly from his hesitancy to let Harry go with them and partly
because of his doubts as to whether his son ought to keep the boat at
all. Of these latter misgivings he was cured by an elaborate argument of
Pee-wee’s. Or, in any event, he surrendered—and Pee-wee took the credit.

“I’ve got a peach of an argument I’m going to give him,” said Pee-wee, as
he and Roy and Garry were hiking it to Shady Lawn for a set of tennis.
“It’s what the lawyers call a teckinality. Don’t you remember he used one
last year when he gave us the boat?”

He found Mr. Stanton on the porch, and perched himself upon the railing
near him, swinging his legs.

“I don’t know,” said Mr. Stanton, when Pee-wee broached the subject,
“whether I shall let Harry keep the boat or not. Mr. Waring was rather a
queer man, and I don’t know whether we ought to take his will too
seriously. I shouldn’t wish you boys to be disappointed,” he added,
thoughtfully.

“Well, I’ll tell you how it is,” said Pee-wee. “You’re a lawyer, kind of,
aren’t you?”

“Kind of,” Mr. Stanton conceded.

“I thought it all out last night. Now you gave us a boat, didn’t you? And
I’m not saying that wasn’t a dandy thing to do.”

“I’m glad you have found pleasure in it.”

“Only the trouble was the fellow that owned the boat was alive all the
time and so you really didn’t have any right to give it to us. That’s a
teckinality, isn’t it?”

Mr. Stanton laughed.

“So if Harry didn’t have a boat of his own, why, then, of course, we’d
have to give the _Good Turn_ back to him—’cause it’s his, see? But, of
course, as long as he _has_ a boat of his own, it’s all right. Anyway,
you couldn’t stop us from leaving the _Good Turn_ at Nyack Landing if we
wanted to. Even if you were a—a—judge, you couldn’t do that, could you?”

“I seem to be at your mercy,” said Mr. Stanton.

“And there’s another dandy argument, too—a peach!”

“If it’s one of your own, I should like to hear it.”

“Well, you want Harry to get well, don’t you? Maybe you don’t know all
that Garry Everson did to make him—to help him get better. And then he
gave him up so’s Tom could have a full patrol. Gee, even _we_ didn’t know
what kind of a fellow Garry was—we didn’t. But we know now, you can bet.
Maybe Harry would get worse again if you took that boat away from him.
He’s just thought of a dandy name for it—the _Honor Scout_.”

“Hmmm,” mused Mr. Stanton.

“Isn’t that one pippin of a name?”

“I think we may let him have the boat,” said Mr. Stanton, thoughtfully.
“The whole circumstance is so very strange——”

“And can he make the cruise with us to Plattsburg?”

“We will see what Mr. Ellsworth thinks—and the doctor. I don’t quite
see,” Mr. Stanton added, after a thoughtful pause, “how Harry can become
a member of Tom Slade’s patrol, much as I should like to see him the
companion of you boys. We live so far from Bridgeboro——”

“It seems that way to you because you’re not a scout,” interrupted
Pee-wee, patronizingly. “But we’ve thought it all out and we’ve decided
that twenty-three miles isn’t so far. You see, when you’re a scout
distance doesn’t amount to anything, because we hike. And if you go
scout-pace, you don’t get tired at all. Did you ever try scout-pace?”

“No, I never did.”

“Well, you’ve missed something. You ought to try it. Would you like me to
show you?”

“I think I’ll stick to the automobile,” said Mr. Stanton, dubiously.

“Well, you know, when Harry gets all well he could paddle down and he
could run the machine, and besides they have two autos at Roy’s and he
runs them, and they’ve got one at Westy’s—of course, it isn’t exactly an
automobile, it’s a Ford—and in the summer it would be easy going back and
forth and in the winter we only have one meeting a week, and he could
come down Fridays and stay at my house till Sunday. Oh, gee, I hope
nothing will happen now to stop him from joining Tom’s patrol. Tom would
be awful disappointed.”

Nothing did happen, and Pee-wee took his full measure of glory. The
doctor proved his staunch supporter, and even Mrs. Stanton said
reluctantly that she supposed Harry might go, but that they must be very
careful to bring him safely home to her again.

“Didn’t we bring him home once?” Pee-wee demanded. “You leave it to me.”




                              CHAPTER XIV
              FIRST BRIDGEBORO B.S.A BECOMES A FULL TROOP


“We’ll have the initiation on the boat, hey?” exclaimed Pee-wee. “Just
like in _Pinafore_, kind of. Ever see that play? It’s a dandy! I saw
it—the whole of it is supposed to be on a ship.”

“Can I come and see the initiation?” Ruth Stanton asked.

“I’m sorry,” began Roy, “but——”

“I don’t believe a word you say.”

“You leave it to me,” said Pee-wee. “I’ll fix it.”

So the installation of Harry Stanton as a scout and a member of the Elk
Patrol took place on the deck of his own beautiful cruising launch as it
lay at Nyack Landing. The troop’s own ceremony, by which Tom himself had
become a scout, was used, but it had been performed so many times since
then that it went off with a routine smoothness, free from any of the
little hitches that are apt to mar the impressiveness of scout
ceremonials. The three patrols were grouped separately and Mr. Ellsworth
stood apart from them.

Garry, who, though an outsider, was asked to participate, presented the
applicant to Tom.

The three simple requirements of the tenderfoot—familiarity with the
twelve laws and the history of the American flag, and the ability to tie
four kinds of knots—had been proved informally at Shady Lawn and it
remained only for Tom to read the laws one by one, pausing after each and
asking the applicant if he agreed to accept it and abide by it. Then Tom
presented him to Mr. Ellsworth and Harry, nervous but trying to be
self-possessed, made him the scout salute, then offered him the
hand-clasp, and then made the scout sign, holding up his hand with the
three fingers upright.

Then he took the familiar scout oath, and Tom stepped forward and pinned
the tenderfoot badge on him. Then the whole troop filed past, each giving
him the scout hand-clasp, after which he stepped back with Tom as the
members of the Elk Patrol raised their voices in unison, simulating the
cry of the elk.

And so the Elks, for whom the former hoodlum of Barrel Alley had striven
and worked and planned, became a complete patrol at last.

“All over but the shouting,” said Roy, not letting a minute elapse.
“Better to be a pro-ally Elk than a German Silver Fox, hey? Listen to the
Ravens rave,” he added, as that patrol set up its familiar cry in honor
of the occasion. “Some flock! Let’s give the voice of the package—I mean
the pack. Come on, Foxes!”

The Silver Foxes prided themselves on the accuracy of their fox call, and
the attenuated “Haa-haa” resounded musically from the hills around.

“It’s beautiful, isn’t it,” said Ruth Stanton, standing close to Garry
and Raymond, who were watching half enviously. “I don’t see how they can
do it. Did you have a call when you had your patrol last summer?”

“It wasn’t much of a call, it was kind of a squeak,” said Garry in his
quiet way. “We called ourselves the ‘Church Mice’ because we were so
poor. It wasn’t very much of a patrol and it all fizzled out.”

“Wasn’t that too bad! Why did it?”

“Oh, one fellow had to go away to school; another moved out west, and—oh,
I don’t know, it evaporated, sort of. You see, Edgevale isn’t much of a
place.”

“They used to have a lake there,” interrupted Roy, “but a bird stopped
for a drink one day and after that they couldn’t find the lake. Shows you
what a big place it is—hey, Garry?”

Garry laughed good-naturedly.

“Not very far from where we live is Vale Centre; Warrentown is near, too.
That’s the county seat and they’ve got a bully troop there.”

“Why don’t you join that?” asked Ruth.

“Well, it’s a full troop, and when a troop’s full it can’t be any fuller.
You just have to start another and I guess I wasn’t smart enough—hey,
Raymond? We’re just free lance scouts now,” he added. “I don’t know as
they’ll call us scouts at all at National Headquarters.”

“You should worry,” called Roy, overhearing scraps of their talk.

“You’ve done something more than form a patrol,” Ruth said, soberly. “You
should have heard what Dr. Brown said about you—and my father and mother.
That headquarters wouldn’t dare to say you aren’t a scout.”

“Oh yes, they would—they’re very brave. They’ve got heroes in there who’d
think no more of cancelling an index card——”

“You’re almost as silly as Roy. But I know you don’t think it’s a joke. I
can see by the way you look at them how you feel.”

“They’re a fine troop,” Garry said, as he watched the boys. “Next to that
troop in Warrentown they’re the best all-around troop I ever saw—and you
see some pretty good ones up there at camp.”

Ruth told her mother that afternoon that she liked Garry better than any
of them—he was so quiet and had such a funny way of saying things.

“Better than Roy?” Mrs. Stanton asked.

“Yes, Roy’s so foolish.”

But just the same, after the _Honor Scout_ had gone away, she missed Roy
immensely. Indeed, she missed them all; their brief stay (entirely apart
from the miraculous return of her brother) had been a delightful event in
her life, and now with only the parrot to relieve her loneliness, it
seemed as if the bottom had fallen out of things. Even the parrot
reminded her of Roy, for when she told the bird that it was lonesome and
slow at Shady Lawn, he replied, “You should worry!”—a phrase which he had
never been known to use before.




                               CHAPTER XV
                     CRUISING IN THE “HONOR SCOUT”


“I don’t say I’ll get it this summer,” said Tom in his sober and rather
awkward way. “’Cause you can never tell what you’ll get. I care more
about all the members getting them, anyway, and when we get twenty-one
we’re an Eagle Patrol.”

“There’s no such thing as an Eagle Patrol, Tom,” said Mr. Ellsworth.

“If a scout is an Eagle Scout when he gets twenty-one merit badges,” said
Tom, doggedly, “then a patrol is an Eagle Patrol when it has twenty-one
merit badges. I don’t care what National Headquarters says.”

Mr. Ellsworth laughed. The patrol idea was so firmly rooted in Tom’s mind
that he could never think of the individual scout. Rule or no rule, you
couldn’t pry that notion out of his head with a crowbar. Everything was
for the glory and honor of the patrol.

“You’ve only one more to get yourself to be a star scout, haven’t you?”
asked Garry.

“I got nine,” said Tom. “We got sixteen in the patrol. If I get one more
I’ll be a star scout as you call it. I’d like the Gardening Badge or the
Automobile Badge——”

“Smallest flivvers thankfully received, hey?” said Roy.

A half dozen or more of them were sprawled upon the cabin roof as the
_Honor Scout_ glided silently up the river.

“Merit badges are a cinch,” said Roy.

“No, they’re not either,” said Connie Bennet.

“Sure, all you have to do for the Architecture Badge is to build a castle
in the air. Know how to win the Astronomy Badge?” he asked, turning to
little Raymond who was always hugely amused at Roy’s nonsense. “Jump out
of a third-story window, land on your head and see stars. The Aviation
Badge is easy, too. Fly up in the air when anybody kids you—like Pee-wee.
Know how to win the Plumbers’ Badge? Just have a pipe dream. Know how to
win the Photography Badge? Cultivate _taking_ ways.”

“Tell some more,” said Raymond.

“Well, if you want the Blacksmith’s Badge, you just forge a check, and
for the Business Badge, mind your own business.”

“I think we’d _better_ mind our business,” said Mr. Ellsworth, “and slow
down if we expect to stop at West Point.”

“Man the tiller, Pee,” called Roy. “I don’t mean _man_ it, I mean _small
boy_ it.”

They paused for a visit at West Point, where they were cordially received
and shown about. They saw the immaculate barracks, watched the drill
which was carried through with the precision of clock-work, noted with
envy the erect posture and almost mechanical salutes of the young
officers, and Pee-wee, at least, felt assured that the talk which he had
heard about unpreparedness was without foundation.

“It makes me feel like a tramp,” said Will Bronson, as they resumed their
cruise, “to see all those swell uniforms and the way those fellows stand
and walk.”

“Some class,” agreed Roy, perched in his usual place upon the combing.

Mr. Ellsworth, who was steering, laughed. “I guess they don’t always look
like that,” said he.

“If Germany sinks many more of our ships, they won’t look like that,”
said Connie. “They’ll put on khaki and roll up their sleeves.”

“You said something,” observed Roy.

“What would _we_ do if the country went to war?” asked Pee-wee.

“Move to the city,” said Roy.

“I like uniforms,” said a timid voice, “because that shows what you are;
a policeman makes you feel safe and so does a soldier, because they have
their uniforms. It says in a book I read, ‘Show your colors’ and that
means, show what you are.”

Everybody turned and stared at little Raymond Hollister who was sitting
on the cabin with his feet dangling in the cockpit. It was not often that
he spoke up. Indeed, he had never seemed to be thoroughly at home with
anyone except Garry and Jeb Rushmore. They all liked him for the quiet,
odd little fellow that he was. They seldom jollied him as they did
Pee-wee and they humored his prejudices and notions when those became
known. He would sit, hour in and hour out, quietly listening to their
talk, laughing at Roy’s nonsense, and occasionally emboldened to defend
Garry against some bantering charge.

“Right you are, Ray, old pal,” said Roy. “It’s the suit that makes the
scout. That’s a good slap at Tomasso; sling it into him, Ray!”

“I don’t know,” said Mr. Ellsworth. (He always hesitated to direct their
arguments, preferring to let them dope things out themselves.) “The
uniform is only good for what it means—as it seems to me. To be a scout
means certain things and to wear the uniform says to the world that you
are for those things. So I’m for the uniform. The uniform is the scout’s
chief badge. It’s just a great, big merit badge and it ought to be worn
like the other merit badges.”

“There might be an invisible badge,” said Tom.

Everybody laughed except Tom himself.

“I’m afraid not,” said Mr. Ellsworth. “An invisible badge wouldn’t be a
badge at all.”

“It would be like a silent noise,” said Roy, “You’ve got the right idea,
Raymond, _Show your colors_. Rub it into him? He sold the _Friday Evening
Pest_ all winter and he got fifty cents twice a week for leading Miss
Wade’s kindergarten class in physical torture; gee, I think he’s saving
up to pay the national debt, or something! And look at him with that old
book strap for a belt. Can you beat it!”

Roy’s propensity for jollying, together with his known fondness for Tom,
made it possible for him to say almost anything he chose, and he never
lost a chance to set people good-naturedly by the ears. But you never
know where a spark is going to fall. If these sparks of wit had fallen
only upon Tom they would have had no more effect than water, for he knew
Roy, and their friendship was as a rock.

But they fell upon little Raymond Hollister, where they ignited other
sparks which were already smouldering. Like many boys who have been
invalids and have been much by themselves, Raymond had notions; away back
home he had first been attracted to the scouts by the trim khaki regalia;
it was the first bait Garry had used with him, and to Raymond at first a
scout was simply a boy who wore a khaki suit. With Garry’s help, the
pale-faced little fellow had managed to wriggle through the tenderfoot
tests, and then he wanted his suit. It was all he had thought of. I dare
say there are a few other scouts like him. He had not delved very deeply
into the Handbook.

The members of the little struggling patrol had slipped away until there
was no patrol, but Raymond still wore his precious suit and felt that he
was a Boy Scout. Perhaps he had the right idea, too, if you will just
subtract his prejudice. _Show your colors_ is a good slogan, but little
Raymond went farther than that. He assumed that if you didn’t show your
colors it was because you didn’t have any; and like most scouts of the
tenderfoot class, he was a great stickler for the khaki, for its own
sweet sake.

He had (as he had confided to Pee-wee that first night in camp) never
“fallen for” Tom Slade. There was not much of the scout glamor about Tom
and Raymond liked the scout glamor. He worshipped Roy and he idolized
Garry. He was so jealous for Garry that he looked on Tom as an unfair
rival. Who had sent that smudge signal from the hill? Who had made Harry
Stanton get better? And who had been treated like a dog during his whole
vacation? Who but his friend, Garry.

And who had taken Harry Stanton when he _got_ better, and broken up the
little patrol which was just starting up all over again? Why, that was
the fellow in the gray shirt and the book-strap belt, who was no scout at
all—Tom Slade. Raymond knew what a scout was—he had seen pictures enough
of them.

Probably, his diffident nature would have kept him from saying more now
except for Roy’s laughing encouragement and the belief that Mr. Ellsworth
stood with him. In any event, he launched forth in a way which astonished
them all.

“That’s why you don’t wear the uniform—because you’re not a scout!” he
shouted at Tom. “You’re too stingy, you are, and everybody knows it!
You’ve no right to go with fellers that are scouts! You—you get them to
name their boats after you—fellers—fellers that you stole—yes, _stole_,
you did!”

It was unfortunate that both Mr. Ellsworth and Garry, either of whom
could have smoothed this thing out in half a jiffy, were on the forward
deck getting the anchor ready to cast, and the other scouts were too
surprised, and perhaps a little too amused, to put a stop to his tirade.
Probably they did not think it would affect Tom.

But Raymond, losing all control of himself, his eyes brimming and his
voice trembling, went on:

“That’s because—you—you lived down in an alley where people kill each
other—and burglars live—and men get drunk and you don’t know how other
kinds of people act—you don’t.... And maybe, you stole other things
before—maybe you did—before you ever _stole_ Jeff—I mean Harry Stanton!
_I_ wouldn’t call you a scout with your old rags on—I wouldn’t. Scouts
wear the uniform and they don’t steal——”

Then they stopped him.

“It’s my fault,” said Roy, as Connie vaulted to the cabin edge and put
his arm about Raymond, trying to quiet him.

“I know about scouts—I do—and I know what a scout is—I do——” he shouted,
almost crying.

“All right, all right, Ray,” said Connie, soothingly.

Tom Slade looked up, straight at Raymond. He was gulping and it was
pitiful to look at him. “I know I did,” he almost sobbed. “I——”

“Never mind, Tom,” said Roy, softly. “Don’t mind him. He doesn’t mean
it.”

“I know I did,” Tom said again. “But you _can_ have an invisible badge,
just the same—I don’t care for Mr. Ellsworth or anybody.”

With a supreme effort to control himself, swallowing sob after sob in
great painful gulps, he pushed aside the cabin locker, went down into the
cabin and banged the door shut.

Roy followed after him, but Tom’s stolid nature had been pierced at last
and he turned away even from Roy.

“Of course, you can, Tom,” said Roy, almost frightened at his emotion.
“You _can_ have an invisible badge, Tom—I know you can, Tom.”

He did not know exactly what Tom had meant; like many of his expressions,
it had been a puzzle to them all, but he would have said almost anything
now to soothe him and help to efface those black memories.

“Sure you can, Tom,” he repeated. “That’s easy—old man. It’s a cinch!”




                              CHAPTER XVI
                          THE INVISIBLE BADGE


“What the dickens does he mean by an invisible badge, do you suppose?”
Westy Martin asked.

“You can go through _my_ pockets,” said Roy. “Tomasso is the Boy Scout
puzzle. They ought to give him away with a years subscription to _Boys’
Life_. I wish that hadn’t happened, though. Jiminy, who’d have thought
that kid would go up in the air like that!”

Tom had not been long in regaining his stolid composure; he appeared to
entertain no grudge against Raymond, and even offered to bait his hook
for him, for the little fellow angled continually, notwithstanding that
he never caught anything. But his offer was indignantly refused, and
Raymond would have nothing to do with him.

The _Honor Scout_ cruised leisurely up the river, held at anchor for the
scouts to swim now and then, and making shore at safe places when the
tide was full, for luncheon or supper on the wooded banks with the
precipitous mountains rising sheer above them.

Harry Stanton was hardly recognizable now as the panic-stricken,
scatter-brained youth whom they had found on the mountain. Under Mr.
Ellsworth’s eagle eye he had a chance to show his skill at swimming, but
his wish to be ever in the water was discouraged and for the most part he
contented himself with reading the Handbook and studying the second-class
tests. Already he had “backfired” which was the word they used for the
act of qualifying for a merit badge before one reached the stage where
the scout rules would permit him to receive such a badge.

This was in music. He had played a mandolin in former days and now he had
one of those Hawaiian instruments—a Ukulele—and he would sit on the cabin
locker by the hour picking out the soft South Sea airs, to the delight of
the whole troop.

The dream of his life at present was to attain to second-class, and he
would talk eagerly about tracking and signalling and first-aid. His
impulsiveness sometimes ran to the point of agitation and he seemed to
have little balance wheel when he got excited, but he was getting better
fast and as the boys came to know him for what he was they grew to like
him immensely.

In the course of their meanderings northward, they came again to Catskill
Landing and Roy, Doc Carson and Pee-wee hiked up to the camp to see how
things were and to get a sweater which Doc had left there, while the
others transferred some of the luggage from the _Honor Scout_ to the
_Good Turn_, for the Elks meant to continue in the smaller boat so as to
relieve the rather congested condition of the other.

Late in the afternoon the three scouts returned, Doc carrying the sweater
on the end of his staff like a pennant. Roy carried a large jar of
marmalade (or “motherlade” as he called it) which the chief cook had
presented to the voyagers; and Pee-wee carried an extensive scout smile.
He was Law Eight, personified.

“What’s the news?” called one of the group that was lolling on the _Honor
Scout’s_ cabin.

“The plot grows thinner,” said Roy. “Here, take this and put it in the
galley, compliments of Beefsteak Ben.... Don’t say a word, a dark and
bloody mystery has been solved. Believe _me_, they’ve got a sleuth up
there that has Tom beaten forty-’leven ways.”

“How’s everybody?” Will Bronson asked.

“Fine,” said Doc. “There’s two troops there from Boston——”

“You ought to see the beans that crowd eats,” Roy interrupted; “and mince
pie—go-o-odnight!”

“There’s a bunch came from Brooklyn——”

“Can you blame them?” interrupted Roy again.

“And a troop from Canada——”

“Daon’tcher knaow,” interrupted Roy, with an exaggerated imitation of the
English accent.

“Gee, that’s some troop,” said Doc. “They came from Montreal and they
wear trousers that don’t tuck in and show part of their legs and they
wear little silver swastika badges that they get for special service.
They look awfully different from the other fellows——”

“They showed us how to raise the English flag,” said Pee-wee, excitedly.
“Maybe you think the English flag hasn’t got any top and bottom to it.
Anybody can tell when the American flag is upside down——”

“Well, I should hope so,” said Mr. Ellsworth.

“And maybe you think because the English flag has a center design that
you can’t fly it upside down—— There’s where you’re wrong!”

“I don’t see that any of us is wrong since none of us has committed that
crime,” laughed Mr. Ellsworth. “We’re not in the habit of flying the
British flag at all.”

“I did,” boasted Pee-wee.

“Well, then, don’t blame us for your sins,” chuckled the scoutmaster.

Pee-wee subsided for the moment, but the time was to come, and that not
so far distant, when this redoubtable “good turner” should enter stores
and even public buildings, in Uncle Sam’s domain, and do the British
Empire a good turn by explaining how her proud emblem was being flown
without, upside down.

“They’ve been doing war work,” said Doc. “They built recruiting stands in
Montreal, and they sand-papered three thousand muskets that had to be
varnished, and distributed enlistment posters, and—— Oh, I don’t know
what all. They showed us a poster like the ones they distributed. It said
‘Meet me at the battle-line.’”

“Meet me at the clothes-line, that’s where I hang out!” put in Roy.

“Oh, they’re one peach of a troop!” enthused Pee-wee.

This troop of Canadian scouts had produced a great impression on the
three boys, and, from their account, had done the same on all the others
at Temple Camp. The three were full of enthusiasm for their
wide-awakeness and efficiency, to say nothing of their patriotic
activities. It started the Bridgeboro boys thinking of what part they
might be permitted to play if Uncle Sam were drawn into the great war.

These Canadian youngsters, according to Doc, had shown the greatest
friendliness toward their American brothers, standing with hats removed
when the _Star Spangled Banner_ was sung, and had become very popular in
camp, and shown an almost uncanny proficiency in tracking and the faculty
for deduction. One of their patrol leaders, indeed, was a veritable
hand-writing expert, and knew besides dozens of scout signs used in the
Canadian Rockies. But it fell out that he did Tom Slade a very bad turn.

The enthusiastic report of the boys had two very marked effects upon the
party, one of which they would be destined to recall in strenuous days to
come. These were their admiration for the fine organization and superb
proficiency of the English scouts, and for the manner in which they were
“doing their bit” for their country in these days of trial. It seemed to
bring the Bridgeboro boys very near to the war.

Garry, who sat quietly upon the combing listening to Doc’s account, with
occasional spasmodic punctuations by Pee-wee, thought regretfully of his
own efforts to form a little troop, and of how meagre and discouraging
the results had been beside these splendidly organized scout units with
which it seemed his fate to mingle.

“Well, how about the mystery?” Connie Bennet prompted.

“I thank you,” said Roy. “The mystery is all right, all right, and it
proves the good old rule that your sins are sure to find you out. I hold
here an envelope to be delivered to Tomasso Slade—main geezer of the
Elks. Stand, Tomasso, so I can get a good shot at you! _Who sent the
money for Raymond Hollister to stay at camp till September?_” he shouted,
suddenly. “And you thought you’d get away with it, didn’t you—you big
sneak! Deny it at your peril! _Now_ I know where the profits from the
_Friday Evening Pest_ went! There’s a fellow—Rolly Culver, from Montreal,
Canada—who has _your_ number, all right! Deny the allegation and denounce
the alligator, if you dare!”

Everybody stared at Tom, who was blushing right up to the roots of his
towsled shock of rebellious hair.

“What do you mean?” said he, sullenly.

“Ah, well may you ask what I mean, Sherlock Nobody Holmes!” triumphed
Roy, shaking the envelope exasperatingly in Tom’s face. “I mean that you
tried to beat Mr. John Temple to it—that’s what I mean! And Rolly Culver
from Canada FOILED you! See?”

“No, I don’t,” said Tom, glancing shamefacedly across the deck at little
Raymond and looking as if he had committed a crime.

“I mean it’s good we hiked up there,” said Roy, more seriously. “A check
got there yesterday from Mr. Temple—a check for fifty bucks—mailed in the
West Indies. It was for Raymond to stay at camp till fall.”

“Go-o-odni-ght!” exclaimed Will Bronson.

Garry stared, intensely interested.

“You ought to have heard Jeb tell about it,” said Roy. “‘When I see es
haow they follyed one anuther up,’” he went on, accurately mimicking Jeb.
“‘I sez thar’ must be sump’n wrong somewhar.’ And just by chance,” Roy
continued, “he hauled out of his old buckskin wallet the old crumpled
piece of paper that had come with the other money—the fifty buckarinos in
cash—and it’s lucky he happened to show it to that Culver kid, believe
_me_! That fellow said it was the same writing as the writing on the
bulletin board at camp. Other fellows said, no; but he stuck to it and
showed them how to compare curves and letters, and strokes and dots and
things—even straight lines—and there you are,” concluded Roy,
delightedly. “We all know who had charge of the bulletin board—— And you
thought you’d make Mr. Temple the goat, didn’t you, with your two
twenties and a ten! You thought he’d forgotten Raymond, didn’t you. And
you thought you’d get away with it! We’ve got your number, Tomasso, my
boy, and we know why you’ve been wearing old gray flannel shirts and book
straps, and things. Here you are—there’s your fifty!” he concluded,
throwing the envelope triumphantly in Tom’s face. “It would have gone
back to Mr. Temple if it hadn’t been for Rolly Culver and me!”

There was no mistaking Roy’s overwhelming delight, despite his
denunciatory tone and he watched joyously as Tom, distressed and
uncomfortable, in face of the whole troop’s stare, tore open the envelope
and took out two twenties and a ten. For Roy had asked the camp trustees
who cashed the check to return Tom’s money in just the form in which he
had sent it, when, having seen the Temples start for South America, he
had gone to the post-office at home in Bridgeboro, and with
characteristic disregard of the risk, had sent his whole savings in cash
to Temple Camp, that nature might complete the good work she had begun
for little Raymond Hollister.

“I didn’t think anybody’d find out,” said Tom doggedly.

“No, I don’t suppose you did,” laughed Mr. Ellsworth.

“John Temple spoiled it for you,” said Doc.

“You can’t get the best of that man!” shouted Pee-wee. “There’s no use
trying!”

“Tom,” said Garry, simply, “I was always glad I turned Stanton over to
you, but now I’m gladder than ever. You can see yourself what you’ve done
for Raymond.”

“Yes, and we can all see what kind of a pal Raymond has, too,” Roy shot
back. “You’ll be leader of a swell patrol some day, Garry, or I miss my
guess.”

Garry only smiled. “All things come round to him who waits,” said he.

“Come here, Tom,” said Mr. Ellsworth. “If there was a merit badge for
this sort of thing you’d be a star scout tomorrow. Come over here, my
boy.”

There was the faintest reminder of the old hoodlum shuffle in Tom’s
clumsy gait as he went sheepishly across the deck and leaned against the
boat’s rail near his scoutmaster, speechless, almost expressionless. The
book-strap was drawn absurdly tight around his waist. The old, worn,
faded gray flannel shirt that he wore was a sight. But upon the back of
it, such as it was, Mr. Ellsworth administered a resounding slap.

“That’s what you meant by an invisible badge, hey?” said Westy, suddenly;
“a good turn kept secret.”

“I’m afraid none of us have quite understood Tom,” said Mr. Ellsworth,
simply. Then he turned and looked with the winningest smile at little
Raymond. “None of us have understood him, have we, Ray?”

“No, sir,” said Raymond, timidly.

“And it shows us that being a scout means more than just wearing the
scout suit, eh?”

“Y-yes, sir.”

“You see, one can be a very good scout in a very ragged shirt, and he
can, if he wishes to, be a very punk scout in full khaki. You get me,
Ray?”

“Ye-yes, sir.”

“Well, then, what are we going to do about it?” Mr. Ellsworth asked
pleasantly.

Garry understood, if Raymond did not, for he started the little fellow
over toward Tom, and Tom took the timid hand and held it.

Then suddenly, in one of those freaks of impulse that Raymond sometimes
showed, he reached with his other hand and grasped Tom’s arm. With the
arm that was free Tom encircled the small, agitated form.

Raymond was crying like a baby.




                              CHAPTER XVII
                                 LOST!


“Do you know what I’ve decided, do you know what I’ve decided?” demanded
Pee-wee, uproariously.

“Break it to us gently and let us hear the worst,” said Roy.

“I decided that we ought to stop in Albany and have Tom buy a suit. I
didn’t say anything before, but crinkums, he ought not to go to
Plattsburg without a suit. You can see that yourself. And he can get one
now, all right.”

“Hear that, Tom?” said Mr. Ellsworth, quizzically.

They were running up the stretch of river above Castleton and would reach
the capital that day, if their plans held good.

“I got no objections to getting a suit,” said Tom. “I believe in suits. I
never said I didn’t.”

The _Good Turn_ had run up alongside the _Honor Scout_ which had come to
anchor for swimming and luncheon, and Tom and his patrol had gone aboard
the larger boat for “eats,” where an uproarious session of jollying
usually awaited him.

“Hurrah for Sigmund Eisner!” shouted Roy. “He’s the fellow that makes
scouts, hey, Raymond?”

“No, he isn’t,” said Raymond, quite boldly. “He’s the fellow that makes
_suits_.”

“Same thing, only different,” said Roy.

“I guess we all believe in the khaki,” said Mr. Ellsworth, “only we know
it’s not the khaki that makes the scout.”

“Any more than it’s the pants that make the panther, or the badge that
makes the badger,” said Roy. “I vote for Tom to buy a suit and we’ll all
go with him to help him choose it.”

“No, you don’t,” said Tom, with an actual approach to animation. “I won’t
buy it if the whole troop goes along.”

“We wouldn’t kid you,” said Connie. “Honest, we won’t.”

“Hear what Bennover Connet says? We’ll promise to be good and——”

“I’ll take no chances,” said Tom. “I don’t mind if two or three go, so’s
to help me get fitted right, but——”

“One representative from each patrol,” suggested Roy.

“All right,” said Tom, resignedly.

About the middle of the afternoon they reached Albany and tied up at a
lumber wharf right under the shadow of the big night boat, the majestic
bulk of which made the _Good Turn_ and even the more imposing _Honor
Scout_ look very insignificant.

“Now for a fling on shore,” shouted Roy. “Hand me something till I fling
it on shore,” he added, hitching his trousers in true mariner’s fashion.

  _“Oh, the sailor’s life is bold and free,_
    _Yo hum, yo ho, yo ha, yo hee!_
  _The briny foam he doesn’t fear—_
    _When the foam is on an ice cream soda._

Tom’s going to treat.”

Roy, being the leader of the Silver Foxes, represented that patrol in the
suit-buying expedition; Tom represented his own patrol, and Artie Van
Arlen, leader of the Ravens (of whom you shall know more in another
volume) completed the trio.

“Correct imitation of a boy scout hunting for an ice cream soda,” said
Roy, climbing stealthily over the lumber pile and picking his way up to
the street. “Gee, it seems funny to be in a city, doesn’t it? What are
all the flags for?”

“What flags?” said Tom.

“Flag_stones_—you’re walking on ’em. No sooner said than stung!”

“Tom’s easy,” said Artie.

“He bites like a sunfish,” said Roy.

It did not take them long to reach a thoroughfare where their tanned
faces and jaunty, out-of-town air attracted no little attention.

“Maybe they know we’re just fresh from a life on the ocean wave,”
suggested Artie.

“They can see we’re fresh, all right,” said Roy. “We should worry.”

In the first confectionery store which they came to they lined up at the
soda counter from behind which a white-jacketed man smiled at them.

“Give me a raspberry sundae,” said Artie.

“V—vanilla,” said Tom, hesitatingly.

“I’ll take heliotripe—trope,” said Roy.

The man waited, laughing good-naturedly.

“I can’t seem to make up my mind,” Roy went on, studying the tempting
printed list. “Aren’t mad, are you?”

“Me?” said the man. “No, indeed, I’m glad you’re so happy.”

“We’re not happy,” said Roy. “We laugh, ha-ha, and dance ha-ha, but we’re
not happy. I think I’ll take—let’s see—I’ll take—I think I’ll
take—_chocolate_. Happy thought, that’s my patrol color!”

Tom paid for the sodas and Roy bought some peanut brittle. The man smiled
after them as they went out.

“The natives on the island seem to be friendly,” said Roy.

“That’s a good idea,” said Artie, “picking out your patrol color.”

“Sure,” said Roy. “I’m going to write to National Headquarters and tell
them to print a rule in the Handbook—next edition.”

“What?”

“Don’t you know what an edition is? You know what a dish is? Well——”

“_Rule_,” said Artie. “‘Scouts buying sodas should always select their
own patrol colors’?”

“Sure,” said Roy. “Good idea. Tom would always take raspberry, I’d take
chocolate, and you’d take—let’s see——”

“Oh, there’s a big dry goods store,” said Artie.

They cut across the street and entering a large store, asked where scout
supplies were sold.

“Two aisles to your right, then one to your left,” was the answer.

“We get you,” said Roy.

Reaching the point indicated, and seeing no scout supplies, they asked
again.

“Two aisles down and take the elevator to the third floor; then two
aisles forward,” said a young lady.

“We thank you,” said Roy, bowing elaborately.

Having followed these directions and seeing no scout supplies, they
inquired of another clerk.

“In the basement,” said the clerk.

The three tramped back and down the stairway.

“Keep your scout smile on,” said Artie.

“Scouts, I think we’re lost,” said Roy, “and darkness is coming on.”

In the basement they saw tents and canoes in the distance.

“Maybe it’s a scout camp in the wilds of a department store,” said Roy.
“Are you getting tired, Tom?”

“I bet Jeb Rushmore could find it all right,” said Artie.

“You said something; but I think we’re hot on the trail now.”

Arrived at the spot which looked like a camp, they asked for scout suits.

“You want supplies,” said the young lady.

“Right the first time,” said Roy.

“Those are on the fourth floor.”

The three sank down in one of those swinging porch benches and breathed
heavily, much to the girl’s amusement.

“What do you say we blaze the trail,” said Roy, “so other scouts will be
able to follow it?”

“It seems there’s a difference between camping goods and sporting
articles,” said Artie.

“I say, let’s not give up,” contributed Tom.

They rose and sallied laughingly forth, through aisles and around corners
to the elevator. On the fourth floor they found themselves in a
wilderness of carpets and rugs and bureaus, tables, chairs and curtains.

“This beats the hill where we found Stan,” said Tom.

“Keep a good heart, scouts,” said Roy. “We’ll come out all right yet.
This has got the Canadian Rockies beat twenty ways.”

“Sporting supplies?” pleaded Roy of the first clerk they saw.

“Two aisles over.”

“Scout suits?” he asked, reaching that point.

“One floor down, in the boy’s clothing.”

Near the stairway they encountered a friendly looking man in black,
standing with his hands clasped behind him.

“Hey, mister,” said Roy, “we are boy scouts and we’re lost. It’s getting
late and we have to get back to our boat before dark. We can’t seem to
hit the right trail and we’re afraid we’ll starve if night comes on. We
want to find the place where they sell scout suits.”

The man laughed pleasantly and resting his arm over Roy’s shoulder, went
part way down the stairs with them and pointed to a scout suit on a
wooden form at the other side of the store.

“There you are,” he said, smiling.

“We thank you,” said Roy.

“Don’t lose sight of it,” suggested Artie.

“We’re all right now,” said Tom.

Reaching the elusive spot, they found themselves at last at the haven of
their desire, for there was the wooden boy scout facing them, his stiff
arm raised and his painted fingers sticking upright in the scout salute,
as if to greet the tired wayfarers, who sank down, panting
ostentatiously, upon a bench close by.

“What do you say we agree not to tell the fellows that we were lost
and—and—asked our way?” said Artie.

“All right,” said Tom, “we’re the three leaders and no one knows it but
us. We’ll keep quiet.”

“If Pee-wee should ever hear of this,” said Roy, “and find out that we
_asked our way_—G-o-o-dni-ight!”




                             CHAPTER XVIII
               THE TRAGIC ADVENTURE OF THE FRECKLED SCOUT


The salesman was busy waiting on two boys, both scouts, one of whom was
evidently buying a new outfit. Tom expressed surprise at this, since the
uniform which he was wearing seemed almost new.

“I suppose the new one is for Sundays,” said Artie.

“We should worry,” said Roy.

The boy who was doing the purchasing was of a trim physique, with very
red hair and he had as many freckles upon his cheerful countenance as
there are stars in the quiet sky. There was much joking, which the
Bridgeboro boys could not hear, between these boys and the salesman, and
while waiting for the purchase to be wrapped the three formed a little
laughing group.

The freckled boy, in particular, interested the waiting scouts who were
attracted by his trim figure, his jaunty manner and the shiny redness of
his rather curly hair.

“Well, I wish you luck,” said the salesman as they left him; “it’s some
stunt!”

As the two passed the bench where the Bridgeboro boys were sitting, the
red-headed boy turned and gave them the scout salute with a merry smile.

“They live around here?” Artie asked.

“No,” said the salesman, inspecting Tom’s scout certificate to be sure
that he was entitled to buy the official suit. “They’re down from their
camp up Lake Champlain. Quite a pair, aren’t they?”

Artie felt that he would like to ask more about them, for he was sure
they had been telling “their adventures,” as Pee-wee would have said, to
the salesman. But scouts are not officious, and these particular scouts
believed somewhat in Roy’s advice for winning the business badge; _viz._,
Mind your own business.

The salesman, however, did vouchsafe them one little morsel of
information while he was fitting Tom.

“They’ve got a great scheme on foot, those kids,” said he.

“I think I know what it is,” said Tom. “They’re going to give a scout
suit to a new fellow for a surprise.”

“Sherlock Nobody Holmes again,” jeered Roy.

The man only laughed. “You scout fellows don’t seem to know what fear is,
do you?” he added, pleasantly.

“We wouldn’t know it if we met it in the street,” said Roy, not, however,
understanding the significance of the remark. “Tomasso’s the
courageousest—look out he don’t bite you! We’ve been feeding him meat
today.”

Tom loosened up and decided he would get a sweater, too, and the joint
deliberation over a suitable color put an end to their immediate thought
of the stranger scouts.

“A kind of a blackish white would be good,” said Roy.

Artie suggested a pale lavender. The salesman was greatly amused at their
talk, but Tom was somewhat nettled and embarrassed, and he was glad when
the completion of the business put an end to their nonsense.

On the way back to the boats and afterwards they speculated somewhat
about the two scouts. There was no particular reason for their doing so
except that the red-headed boy lingered in their minds with his trim
appearance and his vivacious manner. Later, they recalled his jaunty,
careless air, his friendly salute and his winning smile, almost with a
shudder.


“We saw the kind of scout that Raymond believes in,” taunted Roy, upon
their return to the boats. “He had on the full uniform, belt-axe,
whistle, bugle, gaiters, hat——”

“That’s right,” said Mr. Ellsworth, winking at Raymond. “That’s what
they’re for—to be worn.”

“There was only one thing wrong with him,” Roy concluded.

“What?” demanded Raymond, quite boldly for him.

“He was made of wood,” said Roy.

“Well, then, let him serve as a terrible example,” laughed the
scoutmaster. “I dare say there are a few others like him.”

“Did he have any invisible badges on?” Doc asked slyly.

“Doesn’t Tomasso look too sweet for anything?” teased Roy.

“Cut it out,” grumbled Tom. “It’s time to get supper.”

They stayed at their mooring that night and lolled about on the cabin
roof of the _Honor Scout_ while Harry Stanton strummed his ukulele and
those who knew the soft music of the far-off Pacific isles hummed the
airs which seem nowhere so melodious as on the water. A group of small
boys from the unkempt waterside section caught the strains and shuffled
down, grimy and ragged, to sprawl upon the piles of lumber on the wharf,
staring with wide open eyes, and listening. To them it was like a circus
come to town. To the scouts it was a new kind of camp fire.

In the morning they were gone, doubtless leaving a refreshing memory with
the youthful denizens of that squalid neighborhood.

The Hudson above Troy is no longer of majestic beauty and the voyagers
were not sorry for the novelty which presented when they entered the
canal. At least, they did not have to “squint” for hidden perils, though
the locks played sorry havoc with the beautiful enameled freeboard of the
_Honor Scout_.

“Cruising in a canal is about as exciting as a hike on Broadway,”
commented Roy.

“You said something,” agreed Connie.

It was not long, indeed, before the novelty began to wear off, and they
were one and all glad when the boats emerged into the broad expanse of
Lake Champlain.

“Lake Champlain,” said Roy, contemplating it in his favorite attitude,
sitting on the cabin roof with his hands clasped about his updrawn knees;
“Lake Champlain rises early in the morning, takes a northerly course, and
flows into the sink. Correct, be seated, Master Blakeley.”

They could accelerate their speed now and the _Good Turn_ had her work
cut out for her keeping up, even with the _Honor Scout’s_ motor throttled
down to half-speed.

“This is historic territory,” said Mr. Ellsworth. “Almost every rock has
its tale to tell of the bloody French and Indian War——”

“I hope they won’t tell them,” said Roy. “School’s closed.”

But for all that he was interested as “our beloved scoutmaster” recalled
some of the stirring events which occurred along the rugged, historic
shores between which they were passing. They paused to see the ruins of
the old Revolutionary fort at Crown Point, and the restored fort at
Ticonderoga, with its underground passage to the shore.

The first night of their cruise through the lake they tied up at Port
Henry and early in the morning sallied forth into the town for oil,
gasoline and supplies, replenishing their depleted stock sufficiently for
the fifty mile run up to Plattsburg.

“Believe _me_, this is some hike,” said Roy.

“I dare say it looks about the same,” mused Mr. Ellsworth, glancing about
at the wild shore, “as it did when Champlain sailed through it with his
Indian guides——”

“That was sumpty-sump years ago,” said Artie Van Arlen, “you have him in
the third grade.”

“Maybe he stopped at Port Henry for gasoline,” suggested Roy.

“I hope he didn’t have to pay twenty-three cents for it,” said Connie.

For about fifteen miles above Port Henry the lake is comparatively
narrow, then it opens up to a breadth of ten miles or more, becoming a
veritable inland-sea, with the rolling hills of Vermont reaching far
eastward and merging in the distance with the lofty Green Mountains.

About ten miles above Port Henry, and at the narrowest part of the lake’s
narrow stretch, there rises upon the New York side an extent of
precipitous and rugged height known as the Split Rock Mountain. On the
landward side the slope from the mountain is easy enough, but toward the
lake this irregular eminence presents a steep surface interspersed with
woody patches and gray rock. Nestling under this forbidding height is a
narrow area of marshy woodland between it and the shore.

It is related that in the olden days a Mohawk warrior, being pursued and
finding himself upon this dizzy summit without an arrow to his bow, tried
to scramble down and losing his foothold was precipitated against trees
and over rocks and his mangled body became a prey to vultures in the
wooded swamp below. There are guides about that historic water who can
point you where his skeleton and tomahawk were found—if you are disposed
to venture within that tangled morass.

As the little flotilla approached this spot, Tom who was steering the
smaller boat noticed a green canoe drawn up at the wood’s edge, and he
called to Roy, sprawling on the cabin of the _Honor Scout_, to look.

“It’s a canoe all right, ain’t it?” he called.

“Sure it is,” answered Roy.

“It’s the same color as the woods, that’s why you can’t see it plainer,”
said Will Bronson, looking through the field glass.

Scarcely had he spoken when two scouts emerged at the shore and busied
themselves at the canoe for a moment or two.

“Why, that’s the red-headed fellow we saw in Albany!” said Artie, who had
taken the glass. “I can see him plain.”

“Sure it is,” added Roy. “You can recognize him without the glass.”

The scouts on the larger boat passed the glass from one to another,
though most of them could distinguish the boy without it.

“His hair is as red as a brick, isn’t it?” said Mr. Ellsworth.

“That’s him, all right,” said Tom, ungrammatically, from the other boat.

They were almost abreast of the spot when the two boys disappeared in the
woods. Roy had meant to hail them and perhaps would still have done so
but for the fact that the freckled scout presently reappeared alone
climbing up the precipitous slope.

“You don’t suppose he’s going to try to climb that, do you?” Mr.
Ellsworth queried as he watched.

“Looks that way,” said Connie.

“Wonder where the other fellow is.”

The other scout did not appear, and they watched the agile form as it
scrambled up the almost sheer face of the mountain. The sunlight was
falling upon the dull face of rock and touching the sparse vegetation
with its bright glow, and they recognized the boy clearly now, even to
his red hair which shone when it caught the rays of the sun.

“Well—that’s—some stunt!” exclaimed Garry, in amazement. “Do you suppose
their camp is up there?”

“They ought to call themselves the Eagles, if it is,” said Roy.

“Watch him,” called Tom from the other boat.

The eyes of the whole troop were upon the nimble figure as it worked its
way upward, now scrambling, now climbing among trees, now going zigzag
over a precipitous area.

“Some monkey, hey?” called Garry, to the boys in the smaller boat, where
Harry Stanton watched, fascinated.

“Some scout, all right,” one of the O’Connor boys called back.

“That’s a most amazing feat,” said the scoutmaster, watching with the
glass.

Soon the agile form, verging to right or left to follow a path of less
resistance and sometimes pausing to use his brains as a scout should, had
reached a little clump of freakish trees, growing out of rock, and for a
few moments he was hidden from the distant watchers.

They had shut off the power of both boats and lay drifting. A scout is
brother to every other scout, and I dare say the whole party took a pride
in the scout who dared attempt so hazardous an undertaking.

“I could see it in his face,” Tom said.

“Sherlock Nobody Holmes again,” called Roy from the other boat.

Presently, the scrambling figure emerged upon the bare surface above,
wriggling and bracing itself on what seemed to be mere points of rock. A
few yards more and he would be safe upon the wooded summit.

“Don’t shout!” said Mr. Ellsworth, anticipating an impulse on Roy’s part.
“You might rattle him. Wait till he’s out of danger.”

Now he had reached the edge of the woods which covered the summit and
extended somewhat down the precipitous side, and as he disappeared among
the trees the scouts on the lake sent up a lusty cheer.

Scarcely had the echo of their shout died away when Roy jumped to his
feet.

“Look!” he cried.

Following his pointing finger, the whole troop stood aghast in utter
horror as they saw the limp and sprawling figure of the freckled scout go
tumbling headlong over tree and rock down the rugged precipice. Harry
Stanton gasped and almost fainted away. Pee-wee grasped the rail, white
as a sheet.

The figure fell against a crooked tree, the limp arms of the apparently
dead or unconscious boy making no effort to grasp it, then tumbled
headlong from the ledge and fell with a sickening impact upon the jagged
rocks below. There it paused for a second, then fell again like a dead
weight, over sheer walls of rock. Once again it paused against some
obstacle and Mr. Ellsworth, watching with the glass, could see the neck
hanging limp, the head far back in a ghastly, unnatural attitude. The boy
was evidently quite dead. Again the body fell, the loose arms and limbs
sprawling this way and that until it was precipitated over the edge of
the lowest rocky wall and the dreadful sight was ended by its
disappearance into the swampy woods below.

“He must have lost his foothold,” whispered Connie.

“It’s—it’s terrible,” breathed little Raymond, almost in a panic.

“Get the oars,” said Mr. Ellsworth, quietly. “We’ll row ashore. Cast the
anchor,” he called. “We may be able to get the body. That’s about all we
can do, I’m afraid. He probably lost his life with the first impact. He
was dead long before he reached the bottom.”

There was not a scout among them but was sobered by the dreadful thing;
Harry Stanton had lost his nerve entirely; and it was a solemn little
group that scrambled into the _Honor Scout’s_ skiff and rowed for shore.
Garry Everson, who was a better swimmer than any member of the Bridgeboro
troop, had already thrown off his outer clothing and was well toward
shore. Others, for whom there was not room in the skiff, followed
swimming, until only Harry Stanton, Raymond, and Westy Martin whom Mr.
Ellsworth had asked to remain with them, were left on the smaller boat.

“It’s worse than that hill near camp,” Garry called to the boys in the
approaching boat. “It’s a regular everglades.”

They found the place a veritable maze of tangled swamp, with a spongy,
uncertain foothold. In toward the hill the land was firmer but at close
range and without an open view it was impossible to determine where the
body had fallen.

“Can you point out about where it was?” called Roy, from the shore.

Westy pointed as best he could and the shore party, spreading, began a
systematic search of the spot.

“Is this the place?” said Doc who, as a matter of general precaution, had
his first-aid case slung over his shoulder. He was standing on the brink
of a black pool, which they thought to be right under the spot where the
body had fallen.

“Wait till I see how deep it is,” said Garry, wading in. He was soon
beyond his depth and swimming. “If he fell in _there_ we’ll never get
him,” he said, emerging with black slime dripping from him.

“Maybe he caught in the branches of some of those trees,” suggested
Connie.

It was the signal for several scouts to scramble up among the knotty
branches of the trees in toward the precipice, but without result.

They scoured the whole treacherous ground for fifty yards or more in
every direction, but no sign of the unfortunate boy’s body could they
discover. They lashed together the two oars from the boat, making a
length of perhaps twenty feet, and probed the pool but found nothing.

“I’m going to dive into that,” said Garry.

“I don’t think you’d better, my boy,” said Mr. Ellsworth.

But Garry had already dived and came up dripping with mud and slime.

“I couldn’t get to the bottom,” said he; “there _isn’t_ any bottom.”

Tom Slade who, as usual, had pursued his own way, called to the others,
“There’s a kind of a trail here—a pearl necklace,[2] I should think. It
runs through this swamp and up around the side there. See?”

Roy and Mr. Ellsworth, who had come close to him, saw what he meant,
though it is doubtful if even those good scouts would have recognized it
as a trail.

“See?” said Tom, “you can get to the top without that climb. This runs up
around where it isn’t so steep.”

Sure enough, there was a sort of zigzag trail, becoming plainer as it
wound its way up, by which one might ascend by a longer though safer
route. It followed a deep cleft in the rocks and led, as they surmised,
to the easier slope on the landward side of the mountain.

“Why didn’t he take that path, do you suppose?” said the scoutmaster.

“Because he was a dare-devil,” said Roy.

Mr. Ellsworth stood silently as Tom and Roy started up the trail. It led
them, as they had supposed it would, to a broader path by which the hill
could be surmounted. Here were indistinct footprints at intervals. Why
they were not regular Tom could not imagine.

“Why _didn’t_ the fellow go this way, I wonder?” Roy said.

“You answered that yourself,” Tom answered.

They were now upon the summit and could look down and see the two boats
side by side in the lake. It was a dizzy height. Behind them was a broad,
flat plateau which became a gentle slope and fell away into the lower
country beyond. The path crossed this and here the footprints were
plainer and more regular. Then they verged from the path and were
difficult to follow amid the sparse vegetation of the plateau.

A few yards and they ended abruptly at a point where there was a little
disturbance of the earth and what Tom and Roy thought to be the imprints,
very faint, of rubber tires.

“There must have been an auto here,” said Roy.

“It must have been one of those motor-cycle affairs with a kind of a baby
carriage alongside it,” said Tom. “Those prints are too close together
for a regular auto.”

“How could an auto or a motor-cycle get up here, anyway?” queried Roy.

From the spot where they happened to be, they could just manage to trace
a second line of footprints coming from another direction.

Roy was very much sobered by this whole affair, but he could not refrain
from his usual comment, “The plot grows thinner.”

“Come on, let’s follow those,” said Tom.

They did so until the prints ended abruptly upon the flat, rocky surface
near the edge of the precipice.

“I don’t know what to make of the whole business,” said Roy. “Blamed if I
do! It’s a puzzle.”

“My idea,” said Tom, as they started down again, “is this; the other
fellow was down there below somewhere and was going to follow that
fellow, when all of a sudden he fell. They must have chosen that way just
for a stunt, I suppose. Didn’t you ever hear that red-headed fellows are
reckless? It might possibly be,” he added, hesitatingly, “that the other
fellow managed to get his—his body and drag it around up this way. That
might account for the way that path looked back there; if someone had
been dragged along it might sort of wipe out the footprints. I don’t see
how he could have got so far ahead of us, though,” he added.

“But where could he have taken the—body?”

“I don’t know—unless he managed to carry it to that automobile or
whatever it was back there. Maybe they’d left some kind of a car there to
go out on the lake.”

“But all that wouldn’t account for those other footprints we saw out
toward the edge,” said Roy, skeptically.

“No,” said Tom, “unless the other fellow went out there and tried to find
out, maybe, how the dead fellow had happened to fall. Maybe a tree that
he had hold of broke—or something.”

“Then there ought to be footprints back,” said Roy.

“Sure—there were.”

“I didn’t see any.”

“That isn’t saying they weren’t there,” said Tom.

“Tomasso, you’re a wonder.”

“Only how did they ever get an automobile, or a motor baby carriage or
whatever you call it, up to that place?”

“That’s what’s got me,” said Roy.


They found their companions still searching, but almost discouraged, and
Mr. Ellsworth listened with keen interest to Roy’s report.

“Hmmm,” said he, soberly; “you say you saw wheel imprints? Were there no
wheel tracks?”

“No,” said Tom, “but the land was grassy in places and it was pretty
hard.”

“Hmmm?” was all that Mr. Ellsworth could say. “I think the most likely
view is that the body is at the bottom of that bottomless pool,” he
added. “I don’t see that we can do anything else, boys. It goes against
me to go on without finding the poor fellow’s body, but—”

Scouts do not give up easily and they did not leave the spot until it was
too dark to see. Then they went back to the boats, a muddy, dishevelled,
scratched and discouraged band. They did not take kindly to defeat.

“The nearest town,” said Mr. Ellsworth, looking at their map, “is Boquet.
Farther up, on the Vermont side, is Burlington. I suggest that we stop at
both those places and notify the scouts and the authorities. With a
grappling iron they could probably get the body.”

Tom listened with stolid indifference to this apparent repudiation of his
own theory. Probably he did not think the matter worth discussing for in
either case the freckled scout was dead.

There was no music on the cabin roof of the _Good Turn_ that night and
the Silver Foxes and Ravens who lolled about on the _Honor Scout_ did not
call for it, as they usually did. Mr. Ellsworth stood quietly at the
wheel; the others sat or lay about, sober and silent.

“Why so quiet, Roy?” Garry asked.

“I don’t know,” said Roy, who squatted in his characteristic position. “I
can’t seem to get that fellow out of my head—and—and the way he saluted
us back there in Albany. Gee, I can almost hear him laughing now.”

“Guess that’s Burlington where the lights are,” said Mr. Ellsworth.
“Throttle her down to half, Roy, and throw your lead to see how much
water we’ve got.”




                              CHAPTER XIX
                        “SO LONG—SEE YOU LATER!”


It was the afternoon of the following day when the little flotilla,
running past the island of Valcour, sighted a promontory straight ahead
and a little later discovered it to be the embracing arm which forms the
outer boundary of Cumberland Bay.

As they sailed into this spacious haven they could see, a little to the
northwest, a large field dotted with innumerable tents, which on closer
view they saw to be arranged with the utmost squareness and precision, in
avenues.[3] Their first sight of the famous training camp made Temple
Camp seem very insignificant indeed. Out in the lake was a bobbing buoy
with a bulls-eye target upon it, and a group of khaki-clad rookies were
pelting this with rifle shot. In an open part of the field several
companies were drilling and the crisp orders of their officer could be
plainly heard across the water.

“Hurrah for Preparedness!” shouted Roy, throwing his hat in the air.

They had been a rather sober party of voyagers during this last part of
their trip and Roy’s accustomed spirit seemed to have gone from him, but
it came back now with a rush and as usual it had a contagious effect on
the others.

“Hurrah for Uncle Sam!” shouted Pee-wee, grabbing the naval flag from the
stern and waving it frantically.

“They look like scouts, don’t they?” said Mr. Ellsworth.

“Oh, cracky,” enthused Pee-wee. “I’m glad we came!”

“Altogether!” called Mr. Ellsworth, looking over to the smaller boat.
“Hoop it up, Tom! Hurrah for Preparedness!”

“We thought of it first,” called Connie. “Uncle Sam swiped it from us.
Come on, let’s give ’em our own call!”

“_Be prepared! Be prepared! Be prepared!_”

And so, shouting lustily the motto of the scouts the boats came alongside
the landing and were met by several smiling rookies, off duty.

“Are we pinched?” asked Mr. Ellsworth, laughing as he stepped ashore.

“No, indeed; you’re welcome,” said a bronzed rookie.

Pee-wee was not to be repressed by any formal greeting, however
hospitable. He stood upon the _Honor Scout’s_ cabin, waving the naval
flag in one hand and his scout hat in the other, like some frantic,
idiotic form of semaphoring.

“Hurrah for Uncle Sam!” he shrieked, hilariously. “Hurrah for
Preparedness! Hurrah for Platts——”

He stopped short, gaping like an idiot. The flag fell from his hand
unheeded.

“_Look—look!_,” he gasped.

“What is it, the Germans?” asked a rookie, looking around.

“_Look—look!_” he gasped.

They looked, and there, sitting astride a piece of artillery not far from
shore, his legs dangling and a merry smile upon his face, was the
freckled scout!

No sign of scratch or bruise was there about him, and if he had been shot
out of the mouth of the cannon he was straddling he could hardly have
caused greater consternation. Plattsburg, preparedness, Uncle Sam, must
be content with back seats, as this freckled youngster descended nimbly
from the cannon and came smiling toward his brother scouts.

“_Aren’t—you—dead?_” ejaculated Pee-wee.

“Not so you’d notice it,” said the freckled boy with a surprised laugh.

“You don’t find many dead ones among the scouts, I guess,” said an
officer, who had come down to confirm the rookies’ welcome.

“You said something,” said Roy.

“I remember you three fellows,” said the freckled scout. “Don’t you
remember? I was in that store in Albany——”

“Sure, we got lost,” began Roy.

“Shhh,” interrupted Artie.

“We—we thought you were dead,” said Tom, startled somewhat out of his
usual composure.

“Dead? No,” laughed the boy. “I haven’t been dead for quite a while.
What’s the idea?”

“Have—have you got anything the matter with you?” stammered Pee-wee,
staring blankly at him.

“I’ve got a wart on my left thumb,” said the freckled scout, “but that
won’t stop me helping Uncle Sam if we have to scrap it out with Germany.”

“Haven’t you got anything else the matter with you?” Pee-wee asked
imploringly. “Even if you’re alive, you ought to have _something_ the
matter with you—— Gee!”

The freckled scout began to laugh and then came _his_ surprise, for he
broke off as Garry came ashore, and grasped him by the hand.

“Hello, Everson,” said he. “Don’t you know me?”

“For the love of tripe!” said Garry. “You don’t live in Warrentown, do
you? Down near Edgevale?”

“Sure, when I’m alive,” laughed the freckled scout. “But these fellows
seem to think I ought to be dead. What’s the idea, anyway?”

“Well, what _are_ you doing alive, I’d like to know,” said Garry.
“Fellows, this is—Everett, I think your name is, isn’t it?”

“Warren Everett,” said the boy.

“I thought I recognized you,” said Garry. “I didn’t get a good enough
squint at you down the lake yesterday—if that _was_ you.”

“Sure it was me—I saw you fellows out there in the boats. I see I’ve got
you all guessing.”

“Where’s the other fellow?”

“Oh, he’s knocking around somewhere in camp here. We just canoed up for a
squint at the place. I’ve often seen you in Warrentown,” he added,
turning again to Garry. “I heard you fellows over in Edgevale started a
troop.”

“It fizzled out,” said Garry, resting his arm on Raymond’s shoulder.
“We’re the last of our race. But, for goodness’ sakes, tell us how you
come to be alive, anyway? We saw you fall down that cliff——”

Warren Everett laughed again. “You see it was this way,” said he. “On our
way up the Hudson we ran into a moving picture bunch. They had a big
launch and a hydro-aeroplane——”

“A what?” said Tom.

“They said we were just the fellows they wanted because there was a scene
they were going to make where a scout climbs up a steep mountain and then
slips and falls down. They wanted to take pictures of him climbing and
then more of him falling. They had the hill all picked out and they
wanted to know if I’d climb it.

“‘Believe me, that’s my middle name,’ I told them. ‘Let’s see the hill.’

“‘We haven’t got it with us,’ the man said, ‘but it’s a peach, all
right—it looks harder than it is.’

“I asked him about the falling down part, and he said, ‘Don’t you worry
about that. We’ve got a rag dummy to do the falling. All you’ve got to do
is to climb till you get to the grove near the top and when you get
inside of that you’ll find the rag dummy on a log. Just push it over and
let it fall down the hill.’”

“Well—I’ll—be—jiggered!” said Roy.

“Good idea?” laughed Everett. “Of course, the rag dummy went all the way
down to the bottom——”

“You bet it did,” said Connie.

“But in the picture it won’t be that way. You’ll see me climb up the hill
and you’ll see the dummy start down, and then—zip, goes the fillum—and
the next you see is a first-aid scout bandaging up another scout’s head.”

By this time Everett’s companions had joined the party and having
properly presented him to the newcomers, the freckled boy resumed his
original seat astride the cannon.

“You see,” said he, “we were down near Glens Falls when we picked up the
movie men. They had a hydro and a big cabin boat. They gave us the money
for a uniform for the rag dummy and we went back to Albany and bought it.
When we got back they were waiting for us, and believe me, we had some
fun dressing up that dummy. I took the new suit and gave him the old one.
_He_ didn’t care.”

“He should worry,” put in Roy.

The freckled scout continued his story, swinging his legs and greatly
delighted at the astonishment of his listeners.

“This is a most remarkable thing,” said Mr. Ellsworth.

“Can you beat it! Well, we all started north with our canoe tagging
behind. It was all right, wasn’t it, Frank, because we were going that
way anyway. When we got into the lake the man in the hydro left the water
and said he’d meet us on the top of the cliff. He told me just where he’d
leave the dummy. Oh, gee, but he looked nice as he went sailing up in the
air! We got out of the boat at Westport[4] and Frank and I helped them
lug the camera and things to the mountain. We had it all fixed just what
we’d do and when the man found a good place up the hill a ways, where
they could get enough sunlight on the only original Boy Scout movie
star—that’s me!—Frank and I went back to Westport, and paddled up in our
canoe, just as if we were coming to the mountain for the first time. We
got out under the cliff and I started up. Frank stayed down below so he
could get the dummy! Believe me, that dummy has some busy life! They use
it for a policeman and a soldier and a poor orphan child—gee, you ought
to see the clothes that poor dummy’s got!

“Well, I guess you fellows know the rest. I got to the top all right, and
take it from me, when I got my fists on that rag dummy, I gave it
one—good—chuck—_ker-bang!_ G-o-o-d-night!

“Then I trotted over to the big field on top of the cliff where the
fellow with the aeroplane was waiting. Pretty soon along came Frank
dragging the poor dummy after him by the leg. He came up the easy way.
And goodnight, Mary Ann! I’m glad I wasn’t that poor dummy——”

“I’m glad you weren’t,” said Mr. Ellsworth, dryly, thinking of the
harrowing hours they had spent searching for his dead body.

“Well, they said they had the picture all right and it would be a beaut’.
So then the man told us to jump in the aero and he’d bring us up to
Plattsburg. You see that red boat over there with _Back to Nature Film
Corporation_ on it? That’s ours—I mean, theirs. They’re going to take
some pictures here if they can get permission. But we’re out of the movie
business for good—aren’t we, Frank? And we’re going to ship our little
old canoe down home and get the train tonight—— Hey, Everson,” he said,
breaking off suddenly and turning to Garry; “why in the deuce don’t you
be a good scout and come over to Warrentown and give us poor fellows a
hand? Mr. Wentworth, our scoutmaster, is on the Mexican border and three
of our fellows have gone out west to live—the Harris boys—maybe you know
of them. Gee, a fellow like you could help us an awful lot. You could be
a sort of scoutmaster till the Local Council scares one up. And you don’t
live so far—going scout pace. What do you say? Will you?”

_Would he!_

“He will on one condition,” said Mr. Ellsworth. “You and your friend must
join us on our homeward cruise. I’ve heard of the Warrentown Troop and
Garry ought to be glad to get into it——”

“They ought to be glad to get him!” shouted Pee-wee.

“Sure, he’s a bargain,” put in Roy. “Now’s their chance.”

“Yes, I think myself it will be an honor both ways,” said Mr. Ellsworth,
who had grown very fond of Garry. “He will bring you the Silver Cross——”

“And he’s no rag dummy,” interrupted Roy.

“Our plan,” said Mr. Ellsworth, “is to look about the camp here and set
off again in the morning, for time is beginning to be precious. We shall
leave Raymond at Temple Camp, in the Catskills, where he’s to stay for
the balance of the summer. Then, if you like, we’ll drop you boys and
Garry at Edgevale. Our larger boat and one of our members, to whom it
belongs, we shall leave at Nyack. The rest of us live in Bridgeboro, New
Jersey—we’re the First Bridgeboro B. S. A. Probably some of our boys will
hike it home from Nyack while the rest of us cruise down into New York
Bay and up our own small river.”

“It’s just a one-patrol river,” said Roy.

“Are you with us?” Connie asked.

“Sure, he’s with us!” cried Roy. “Who’s deciding this, Warrentown or
Bridgeboro? We’ll drag both of them along by the legs the way they
dragged the rag scout, hey?”


The party made a pleasant stay at the big training camp, walking through
the straight, neat avenues of tents, visiting the commissary, watching
the drill, and lingering, fascinated, about the rookies who were busy at
rifle practice. They were made very welcome and it was not without a
feeling of regret that they went aboard the two boats after the colors
had been lowered. But Plattsburg, of which they were to hear so much
later, had been merely the chosen point of destination for their rambling
inland cruise, and as Mr. Ellsworth had remarked, time was beginning to
be precious.

The hospitable Bridgeboro Troop, with its strangely acquired new member
and its several guests, lolled upon the deck and cabin roof of the _Honor
Scout_ that night, as the two boats waited at their moorings for the dawn
which would mean their departure on the speedier journey homeward.

As the moon rose over the wide bosom of the great lake and flickered the
waters with its silvery brightness, Harry Stanton sat upon the cabin
locker, strumming his ukulele, and those who were in the mood hummed the
soft airs while the others listened. Often whole days would elapse in
which Harry Stanton would be scarcely heard from, but in the quiet of
those summer nights upon the water he contributed his full share to the
pleasure of the party.

If you, to whom I am about to bid a short farewell, are a scout of the
scouts, see to it that some one of your troop’s number learns to play a
mandolin, a banjo, or guitar—even if you have to drag him by the leg, as
young Frank dragged the unfortunate dummy.

After a little while some one discovered that Roy was not among them, and
there was set up at once a hue and cry for him, for such an evening could
be no more complete without Roy than a Buffalo Bill Show would be without
Buffalo Bill or a circus without peanuts.

“Maybe he’s in the other boat,” said one.

“Maybe he’s on shore,” said another.

It was Pee-wee who dragged him forth from the forward end of the cabin,
where he had been ensconced, knees up, “far from the madding crowd.”

“What’s the matter?” asked Artie Van Arlen.

Roy squatted in his customary attitude, holding a paper in his hand.

“I was thinking about all the crazy things that have happened,” said he,
“and the fellows we’ve met on this trip, and believe _me_, it’s some
hodge-podge. I was coming down from that big commissary tent, scout pace,
when some poetry jumped into my noddle. Did you ever notice how poetry
comes to you when you go scout pace?” he asked, turning to Mr. Ellsworth.

“No, I never did,” said the scoutmaster.

“Want to hear it? It’s a sort of—sort of a national anthem of the
troop——”

“Troop anthem?”

“It isn’t fixed up yet because the kid interrupted me. Do you want to
hear it?”

“I dare say I can stand it if the others can,” said the scoutmaster.

“Go ahead, shoot!” said Doc.

“Get the agony over with,” said Connie.

“All right, since you insist,” said Roy, taking Tom’s flashlight so he
could read the immortal lines. “Here goes—one—two—_three_!

  “Rag scouts, wooden scouts,
    Thin heads and thick,
  Honor scouts, young sprouts—
    Just take your pick.

  “Scouts without scout suits,
    Shirts full of holes,
  Silver Foxes—_they’re the beauts_!
    Scouts without patrols.

  “Youth scouts, sleuth scouts,
    Scouts with motor-boats,
  Scouts that come to life again,
    Music scouts and potes.

  “Scoutmaster on the job,
    Something-or-other—welk,
  Hip, hip, hurrah, scouts—
    Raven, Fox and Elk!

“What do you think of it?”

“Of, it’s great!” yelled Pee-wee.

“I think it’s superb,” said Mr. Ellsworth, “especially the complimentary
reference to the scoutmaster.”

“The pleasure is mine,” said Roy, with an elaborate bow.

“But may I ask what a _pote_ is?”

“Sure, a pote’s a scout that writes pomes.”

“I see. And a welk?”

“Well, you see it’s this way,” said Roy, undaunted. “The welkin is the
sky, and welk’s short for welkin. Get me? I was just trying to dope out
how to fit that in when Pee-wee grabbed me.”

“We shall have to make you poet laureate of the troop,” said Mr.
Ellsworth.

“The Bridgeboro Bard,” laughed Garry.

“Do you think if I sent it to _Boys’ Life_ they’d print it?” Roy asked.

“Sure, they would!” yelled Pee-wee.

“I don’t know,” said Mr. Ellsworth, cautiously. “I doubt it. You might
try. They have printed worse things,” he added.

Roy glanced again at his masterpiece, folded it up, put it in his pocket,
drew his knees up, clasped his hands about them, and grinned at the
assemblage.

“_I_ should worry,” he said.


                                THE END




                               Footnotes


[1]Meaning to send a message by a smudge signal.

[2]A pearl necklace is the phrase used by the English in Africa to define
   a trail which is visible and invisible at short, regular intervals.

[3]This is the Plattsburg of 1915-1916.

[4]Westport is just below Split Rock Mountain.


                           _This Isn’t All!_

Would you like to know what became of the good friends you have made in
this book?

Would you like to read other stories continuing their adventures and
experiences, or other books quite as entertaining by the same author?

On the _reverse side_ of the wrapper which comes with this book, you will
find a wonderful list of stories which you can buy at the same store
where you got this book.


                     _Don’t throw away the Wrapper_

_Use it as a handy catalog of the books you want some day to have. But in
case you do mislay it, write to the Publishers for a complete catalog._


                          THE TOM SLADE BOOKS

                        By PERCY KEESE FITZHUGH

           Author of “Roy Blakeley,” “Pee-wee Harris,” “Westy
                             Martin,” Etc.

          Illustrated. Individual Picture Wrappers in Colors.
                    Every Volume Complete in Itself.

“Let your boy grow up with Tom Slade,” is a suggestion which thousands of
parents have followed during the past, with the result that the TOM SLADE
BOOKS are the most popular boys’ books published today. They take Tom
Slade through a series of typical boy adventures through his tenderfoot
days as a scout, through his gallant days as an American doughboy in
France, back to his old patrol and the old camp ground at Black Lake, and
so on.

  TOM SLADE, BOY SCOUT
  TOM SLADE AT TEMPLE CAMP
  TOM SLADE ON THE RIVER
  TOM SLADE WITH THE COLORS
  TOM SLADE ON A TRANSPORT
  TOM SLADE WITH THE BOYS OVER THERE
  TOM SLADE, MOTORCYCLE DISPATCH BEARER
  TOM SLADE WITH THE FLYING CORPS
  TOM SLADE AT BLACK LAKE
  TOM SLADE ON MYSTERY TRAIL
  TOM SLADE’S DOUBLE DARE
  TOM SLADE ON OVERLOOK MOUNTAIN
  TOM SLADE PICKS A WINNER
  TOM SLADE AT BEAR MOUNTAIN


                         THE ROY BLAKELEY BOOKS

                        By PERCY KEESE FITZHUGH

     Author of “Tom Slade,” “Pee-wee Harris,” “Westy Martin,” Etc.

           Illustrated. Individual Picture Wrappers in Color.
                    Every Volume Complete in Itself.

In the character and adventures of Roy Blakeley are typified the very
essence of Boy life. He is a real boy, as real as Huck Finn and Tom
Sawyer. He is the moving spirit of the troop of Scouts of which he is a
member, and the average boy has to go only a little way in the first book
before Roy is the best friend he ever had, and he is willing to part with
his best treasure to get the next book in the series.

  ROY BLAKELEY
  ROY BLAKELEY’S ADVENTURES IN CAMP
  ROY BLAKELEY, PATHFINDER
  ROY BLAKELEY’S CAMP ON WHEELS
  ROY BLAKELEY’S SILVER FOX PATROL
  ROY BLAKELEY’S MOTOR CARAVAN
  ROY BLAKELEY, LOST, STRAYED OR STOLEN
  ROY BLAKELEY’S BEE-LINE HIKE
  ROY BLAKELEY AT THE HAUNTED CAMP
  ROY BLAKELEY’S FUNNY BONE HIKE
  ROY BLAKELEY’S TANGLED TRAIL
  ROY BLAKELEY ON THE MOHAWK TRAIL


                        THE PEE-WEE HARRIS BOOKS

                        By PERCY KEESE FITZHUGH

             Author of “Tom Slade,” “Roy Blakeley,” “Westy
                             Martin,” Etc.

           Illustrated. Individual Picture Wrappers in Color.
                    Every Volume Complete in Itself.

All readers of the Tom Slade and the Roy Blakeley books are acquainted
with Pee-wee Harris. These stories record the true facts concerning his
size (what there is of it) and his heroism (such as it is), his voice,
his clothes, his appetite, his friends, his enemies, his victims.
Together with the thrilling narrative of how he foiled, baffled,
circumvented and triumphed over everything and everybody (except where he
failed) and how even when he failed he succeeded. The whole recorded in a
series of screams and told with neither muffler nor cut-out.

  PEE-WEE HARRIS
  PEE-WEE HARRIS ON THE TRAIL
  PEE-WEE HARRIS IN CAMP
  PEE-WEE HARRIS IN LUCK
  PEE-WEE HARRIS ADRIFT
  PEE-WEE HARRIS F.O.B. BRIDGEBORO
  PEE-WEE HARRIS FIXER
  PEE-WEE HARRIS: AS GOOD AS HIS WORD


                         THE JERRY TODD SERIES

                             By LEO EDWARDS

        Illustrated. Individual Colored Wrappers For Each Story
                    Every Volume Complete in Itself

Detective stories for boys! Jerry Todd and his trusty pals solve many a
baffling mystery in their home town, much to the amusement of all who
read of their adventures.

  JERRY TODD AND THE WHISPERING MUMMY

    Having been duly appointed “Juvenile Jupiter Detectives” Jerry Todd
    and his trusty pals little realize how fast things are going to
    happen. First comes the amazing adventure in the museum in Tutter
    College. Did the mummy actually whisper? And did it later vanish of
    its own accord?

  JERRY TODD AND THE ROSE-COLORED CAT

    Cats by the dozens; cats by the hundreds; and most important of all, a
    mysterious five-hundred dollar rose-colored cat. Then comes the
    lamentable accident to Lady Victoria’s aristocratic tail; the
    operation; the over-dose of chloroform; the funeral. There is a laugh
    on every page.

  JERRY TODD AND THE OAK ISLAND TREASURE

    Jerry Todd and his pals set themselves up in the show business by
    transforming a disused clay scow of Mr. Todd’s into a floating
    theatre. And a very wonderful show it is! Certainly it leads the boys
    into exceptional adventures.

  JERRY TODD AND THE WALTZING HEN

    That strange hen? Why does it waltz? And what is the secret of the
    prowling peril? Then, even as the Hindu had earlier died so quickly
    and mysteriously, the boys’ old friend disappears. Then comes the
    final ludicrous climax.

  JERRY TODD AND THE TALKING FROG

    Jerry Todd and his chums leagued together to help another boy save a
    peculiar invention of his father’s, a talking frog, from thieving
    hands,—wait breathlessly in the lonely brick house where the puzzle
    maker had met with such a strange death. Fun and mystery here!


                     Football and Baseball Stories

             Durably Bound. Illustrated. Colored Wrappers.
                    Every Volume Complete in Itself.




                 The Ralph Henry Barbour Books for Boys


In these up-to-the minute, spirited genuine stories of boy life there is
something which will appeal to every boy with the love of manliness,
cleanness and sportsmanship in his heart.

  LEFT END EDWARDS
  LEFT TACKLE THAYER
  LEFT GUARD GILBERT
  CENTER RUSH ROWLAND
  FULLBACK FOSTER
  LEFT HALF HARMON
  RIGHT END EMERSON
  RIGHT GUARD GRANT




                  The Christy Mathewson Books for Boys


Every boy wants to know how to play ball in the fairest and squarest way.
These books about boys and baseball are full of wholesome and manly
interest and information. Every young American who has ever tried to stop
a grounder or put one over to first will enjoy them and want to own them
all.

  PITCHER POLLOCK
  CATCHER CRAIG
  FIRST BASE FAULKNER
  SECOND BASE SLOAN
  PITCHING IN A PINCH

  THIRD BASE THATCHER, By Everett Scott


                          THE TOM SWIFT SERIES

                           By VICTOR APPLETON

         Uniform Style of Binding. Individual Colored Wrappers.
                    Every Volume Complete in Itself.

Every boy possesses some form of inventive genius. Tom Swift is a bright,
ingenious boy and his inventions and adventures make the most interesting
kind of reading.

  TOM SWIFT AND HIS MOTOR CYCLE
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS MOTOR BOAT
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS AIRSHIP
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS SUBMARINE BOAT
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS ELECTRIC RUNABOUT
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS WIRELESS MESSAGE
  TOM SWIFT AMONG THE DIAMOND MAKERS
  TOM SWIFT IN THE CAVES OF ICE
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS SKY RACER
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS ELECTRIC RIFLE
  TOM SWIFT IN THE CITY OF GOLD
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS AIR GLIDER
  TOM SWIFT IN CAPTIVITY
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS WIZARD CAMERA
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS GREAT SEARCHLIGHT
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS GIANT CANNON
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS PHOTO TELEPHONE
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS AERIAL WARSHIP
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS BIG TUNNEL
  TOM SWIFT IN THE LAND OF WONDERS
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS WAR TANK
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS AIR SCOUT
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS UNDERSEA SEARCH
  TOM SWIFT AMONG THE FIRE FIGHTERS
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVE
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS FLYING BOAT
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS GREAT OIL GUSHER
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS CHEST OF SECRETS
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS AIRLINE EXPRESS


                         THE DON STURDY SERIES

                           By VICTOR APPLETON

         Individual Colored Wrappers and Text Illustrations by
                            WALTER S. ROGERS
                    Every Volume Complete in Itself

In company with his uncles, one a mighty hunter and the other a noted
scientist, Don Sturdy travels far and wide, gaining much useful knowledge
and meeting many thrilling adventures.

  DON STURDY ON THE DESERT OF MYSTERY;
    Or, Autoing in the Land of the Caravans.

    An engrossing tale of the Sahara Desert, of encounters with wild
    animals and crafty Arabs.

  DON STURDY WITH THE BIG SNAKE HUNTERS;
    Or, Lost in the Jungles of the Amazon.

    Don’s uncle, the hunter, took an order for some of the biggest snakes
    to be found in South America—to be delivered alive! The filling of
    that order brought keen excitement to the boy.

  DON STURDY IN THE TOMBS OF GOLD;
    Or, The Old Egyptian’s Great Secret.

    A fascinating tale of exploration and adventure in the Valley of
    Kings in Egypt. Once the whole party became lost in the maze of
    cavelike tombs far underground.

  DON STURDY ACROSS THE NORTH POLE;
    Or, Cast Away in the Land of Ice.

    Don and his uncles joined an expedition bound by air across the north
    pole. A great polar blizzard nearly wrecks the airship.

  DON STURDY IN THE LAND OF VOLCANOES;
    Or, The Trail of the Ten Thousand Smokes.

    An absorbing tale of adventures among the volcanoes of Alaska in a
    territory but recently explored. A story that will make Don dearer to
    his readers than ever.


                         THE RADIO BOYS SERIES

                         (Trademark Registered)

                            By ALLEN CHAPMAN
                 Author of the “Railroad Series,” Etc.

               Individual Colored Wrappers. Illustrated.
                    Every Volume Complete in Itself.

A new series for boys giving full details of radio work, both in sending
and receiving—telling how small and large amateur sets can be made and
operated, and how some boys got a lot of fun and adventure out of what
they did. Each volume from first to last is so thoroughly fascinating, so
strictly up-to-date and accurate, we feel sure all lads will peruse them
with great delight.

Each volume has a Foreword by Jack Binns, the well-known radio expert.

  THE RADIO BOYS’ FIRST WIRELESS;
    Or, Winning the Ferberton Prize.
  THE RADIO BOYS AT OCEAN POINT;
    Or, The Message That Saved the Ship.
  THE RADIO BOYS AT THE SENDING STATION;
    Or, Making Good in the Wireless Room.
  THE RADIO BOYS AT MOUNTAIN PASS;
    Or, The Midnight Call for Assistance.
  THE RADIO BOYS TRAILING A VOICE;
    Or, Solving a Wireless Mystery.
  THE RADIO BOYS WITH THE FOREST RANGERS;
    Or, The Great Fire on Spruce Mountain.
  THE RADIO BOYS WITH THE ICEBERG PATROL;
    Or, Making Safe the Ocean Lanes.
  RADIO BOYS WITH THE FLOOD FIGHTERS;
    Or, Saving the City in the Valley.


                          THE RAILROAD SERIES

                            By ALLEN CHAPMAN
                    Author of the “Radio Boys,” Etc.

                 Uniform Style of Binding. Illustrated.
                    Every Volume Complete in Itself.

In this line of books there is revealed the whole workings of a great
American railroad system. There are adventures in abundance—railroad
wrecks, dashes through forest fires, the pursuit of a “wildcat”
locomotive, the disappearance of a pay car with a large sum of money on
board—but there is much more than this—the intense rivalry among
railroads and railroad men, the working out of running schedules, the
getting through “on time” in spite of all obstacles, and the manipulation
of railroad securities by evil men who wish to rule or ruin.

  RALPH OF THE ROUND HOUSE;
    Or, Bound to Become a Railroad Man.
  RALPH IN THE SWITCH TOWER;
    Or, Clearing the Track.
  RALPH ON THE ENGINE;
    Or, The Young Fireman of the Limited Mail.
  RALPH ON THE OVERLAND EXPRESS;
    Or, The Trials and Triumphs of a Young Engineer.
  RALPH, THE TRAIN DISPATCHER;
    Or, the Mystery of the Pay Car.
  RALPH ON THE ARMY TRAIN;
    Or, The Young Railroader’s Most Daring Exploit.
  RALPH ON THE MIDNIGHT FLYER;
    Or, The Wreck at Shadow Valley.
  RALPH AND THE MISSING MAIL POUCH;
    Or, The Stolen Government Bonds.


                         THE RIDDLE CLUB BOOKS

                          By ALICE DALE HARDY

         Individual Colored Wrappers. Attractively Illustrated.
                    Every Volume Complete in Itself.

Here is as ingenious a series of books for little folks as has ever
appeared since “Alice in Wonderland.” The idea of the Riddle books is a
little group of children—three girls and three boys decide to form a
riddle club. Each book is full of the adventures and doings of these six
youngsters, but as an added attraction each book is filled with a lot of
the best riddles you ever heard.

  THE RIDDLE CLUB AT HOME

    An absorbing tale that all boys and girls will enjoy reading. How the
    members of the club fixed up a clubroom in the Larue barn, and how
    they, later on, helped solve a most mysterious happening, and how one
    of the members won a valuable prize, is told in a manner to please
    every young reader.

  THE RIDDLE CLUB IN CAMP

    The club members went into camp on the edge of a beautiful lake. Here
    they had rousing good times swimming, boating and around the
    campfire. They fell in with a mysterious old man known as The Hermit
    of Triangle Island. Nobody knew his real name or where he came from
    until the propounding of a riddle solved these perplexing questions.

  THE RIDDLE CLUB THROUGH THE HOLIDAYS

    This volume takes in a great number of winter sports, including
    skating and sledding and the building of a huge snowman. It also
    gives the particulars of how the club treasurer lost the dues
    entrusted to his care and what the melting of the great snowman
    revealed.

  THE RIDDLE CLUB AT SUNRISE BEACH

    This volume tells how the club journeyed to the seashore and how they
    not only kept up their riddles but likewise had good times on the
    sand and on the water. Once they got lost in a fog and are marooned
    on an island. Here they made a discovery that greatly pleased the
    folks at home.


                         THE HONEY BUNCH BOOKS

                       By HELEN LOUISE THORNDYKE

      Individual Colored Wrappers and Text Illustrations Drawn by
                            WALTER S. ROGERS

A new line of fascinating tales for little girls. Honey Bunch is a
dainty, thoughtful little girl, and to know her is to take her to your
heart at once.

  HONEY BUNCH: JUST A LITTLE GIRL

    Happy days at home, helping mamma and the washerlady. And Honey Bunch
    helped the house painters too—or thought she did.

  HONEY BUNCH: HER FIRST VISIT TO THE CITY

    What wonderful sights Honey Bunch saw when she went to visit her
    cousins in New York! And she got lost in a big hotel and wandered
    into a men’s convention!

  HONEY BUNCH: HER FIRST DAYS ON THE FARM

    Can you remember how the farm looked the first time you visited it?
    How big the cows and horses were, and what a roomy place to play in
    the barn proved to be?

  HONEY BUNCH: HER FIRST VISIT TO THE SEASHORE

    Honey Bunch soon got used to the big waves and thought playing in the
    sand great fun. And she visited a merry-go-round, and took part in a
    sea-side pageant.

  HONEY BUNCH: HER FIRST LITTLE GARDEN

    It was great sport to dig and to plant with one’s own little garden
    tools. But best of all was when Honey Bunch won a prize at the flower
    show.

  HONEY BUNCH: HER FIRST DAYS IN CAMP

    It was a great adventure for Honey Bunch when she journeyed to Camp
    Snapdragon. It was wonderful to watch the men erect the tent, and
    more wonderful to live in it and have good times on the shore and in
    the water.


                 GROSSET & DUNLAP, Publishers, NEW YORK






End of Project Gutenberg's Tom Slade on the River, by Percy K. Fitzhugh

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TOM SLADE ON THE RIVER ***

***** This file should be named 42155-0.txt or 42155-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/2/1/5/42155/

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, Brenda Lewis and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Print project.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
