The Project Gutenberg EBook of TOOLS AND MATERIALS ILLUSTRATING THE
JAPANESE METHOD OF COLOUR-PRINTING by Edward Strange



This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under
the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or
online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license



Title: TOOLS AND MATERIALS ILLUSTRATING THE JAPANESE METHOD OF
       COLOUR-PRINTING


Author: Edward Strange

Release Date: December 17, 2013 [Ebook #44458]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF‐8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TOOLS AND MATERIALS ILLUSTRATING THE JAPANESE METHOD OF COLOUR-PRINTING
***





                  VICTORIA & ALBERT MUSEUM CATALOGUES




TOOLS AND MATERIALS ILLUSTRATING THE JAPANESE METHOD OF COLOUR-PRINTING

    A DESCRIPTIVE CATALOGUE OF A COLLECTION EXHIBITED IN THE MUSEUM




                            By Edward Strange




London
PUBLISHED BY HIS MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE

1913
            [THE MAKING OF COLOUR-PRINTS—WOMEN AS ENGRAVERS.]

UTAMARO.—Yedo Meibutsu Nishikiye Kosaku. “The making of colour-prints, the
famous product of Yedo: after the engraver’s rough engraving the design is
    carefully carved.”  An illustration of the carving of wood-blocks
    fancifully represented as being done by women. From a print in the
                   Victoria and Albert Museum. J. 5040.





CONTENTS


PREFATORY NOTE
HISTORICAL NOTE
THE DRAWING
CUTTING THE BLOCK
PRINTING
PAPER
BOOKS OF REFERENCE





PREFATORY NOTE


This pamphlet has been prepared by Mr. Edward F. Strange, of the
Department of Engraving, Illustration and Design, for use primarily in
connection with a collection of Tools, Materials and Examples, specially
brought together and now exhibited in the Museum, to illustrate the
technique of Japanese Colour-printing from wood-blocks. The descriptive
matter has been somewhat amplified, in order to render it of value to
those who cannot immediately refer to the Museum collections.

The works of reference consulted, are named herein; and acknowledgment
must also be made to Mr. Hogitaro Inada, for translations from the
Japanese, kindly supplied by him.

                                                              CECIL SMITH.
Victoria and Albert Museum, 1913.

                          ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐





LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


UTAMARO.—Yedo Meibutsu Nishikiye Kosaku. “The making of colour-prints, the
famous product of Yedo: after the engraver’s rough engraving the design is
carefully carved.”  An illustration of the carving of wood-blocks
fancifully represented as being done by women. From a print in the
Victoria and Albert Museum. J. 5040.
DIAGRAM:——Method of framing a block to prevent warping.
DIAGRAM:—The _Baren._—Its internal construction
DIAGRAM:—The _Baren._—Position of pad in sheath.
DIAGRAM:—The _Baren._—Method of use.
DIAGRAM:—Printer’s Desk.
HOKUSAI.—Original drawing for the key-block of an unpublished colour-print
in the series called “The Hundred Poets explained by the Nurse.” A junk,
with straw sail, conveying three travellers; at the bow a breaking wave.
At the top right-hand corner is a poem by Hoshoji no Nyudo Saki no
Kwampaku Daijo Daijin.  O’er the wide sea plain, / As I row and look
around, It appears to me / That the white waves, far away, / Are the
ever-shining sky. From a drawing in the Victoria and Albert Museum. J. D.
1447.
TOYOKUNI. I.—Working proof from the key-block of a colour-print. A
theatrical scene; with the actors Nakayama Tomisaburo and Ichikawa Komazo
in the parts of the Geisha Sankatsu and Hanshichi.  The artist has added a
wash of red colour to the print, with the following MS. note to the
printer, “Please gradate the colour like this.” From a print in the
Victoria and Albert Museum. J. 8494.






HISTORICAL NOTE


The process of colour-printing from wood-blocks, used in Japan from the
early part of the 18th century, has much in common with that of the
so-called _chiaroscuro_ wood-cuts first produced in Italy and Germany
during the 16th century, of which the work of Andrea Andreani (1540-1623)
supplies good examples. It is possible that the Japanese method was
derived from this source, either directly or by way of China. Japanese
tradition ascribes the invention to Takekawa Minosuke (Manji Period, A.D.
1658-1660); and a volume of Costume Designs in the Museum, dated 1667 (O4.
C. 20), is printed in colours, only one, however, being used on each
plate. The Chinese are known, with certainty, to have employed this
process before the end of the 17th century; but no Japanese colour-print
has yet been recorded, which can be placed, authentically, earlier than
the second quarter of the 18th century. Credit for the first production of
them is generally given to Torii Kiyonobu (1664-1729); but the greatest
development was due to Suzuki Harunobu (died A.D. 1770, aged 67 years).
Japanese authorities say that the improvements popularized by this artist
were invented by an engraver named Kinroku, in conjunction with a printer;
and that Harunobu, employing them to reproduce his pictures, about the
year 1765, thus laid the foundation of a school of artists who found their
chief occupation in designing for this class of work. Katsugawa Shunsho
(died A.D. 1792, aged 67 years) developed the process still further; and
it reached its highest technical level before the close of the 18th
century. Soon after the year 1800, a gradual decline is seen; which
manifested itself both in the increase of the number of blocks used, and
in the loss of quality in the colours. However, many prints of remarkably
high technical excellence were still produced up to about the year 1864;
soon after which time, all refinement both of engraving and printing seems
to have been lost. The last 20 years or so, have, however, witnessed a
sort of revival, by no means without merit in its way; and the adaptation
of the process to the requirements of book-illustration and the
reproduction of works of art, has reached a remarkably high standard in
such publications as the _Kokka_ and those of the _Shimbi ShoÌin._

It is not unimportant to add that this process, sometimes modified in
detail, has been revived in Europe; and is now practised by a considerable
number of artists. The Department of Engraving, Illustration, and Design
contains a representative collection of their productions, including a
consecutive set of working proofs (E. 20-26, 1904) of a print by Mr. J. D.
Batten and Mr. Morley Fletcher, who were the first to use the method in
England. The collection also includes a similar set of working proofs of
the modern development of the process, as used for the reproduction of
paintings by Old Masters by the _Shimbi ShoÌin_(E. 1862-2043, 1910).

                          ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐





THE DRAWING


Designs for Japanese colour-prints were made by artists, who, as a rule,
were adherents of the Popular _(Ukiyoye)_ School and, socially, of the
rank of artisans. The drawing was done with a brush on very thin _Mino_ or
_Gampi_ paper, the colours used being washes of water-colour worked with
rice-paste medium. To correct the design, the portions to be altered were
covered with pieces of paper, on which the revised drawing was made.  The
completed design (generally, to begin with, in black lines only, or with
only a little tint as a guide to the engraver) was then fastened face
downwards on the block with rice starch weakened with water. As much as
possible of its upper surface was rubbed away, some oil being used to make
the remainder more translucent, and thus to enable the engraver more
easily to follow the lines of the drawing.

It is evident that this process resulted in the destruction of the
designs. The Museum, however, has acquired a number of unused drawings,
which fully illustrate this stage; and the series of blocks exhibited (E.
4136-4322, 1909) have, in several instances, remains of the paper still
adhering to the uncut portions of their surfaces.

   1. ILLUSTRATION of a colour-print artist making a design; showing his
      position when drawing and method of holding the brush. A
      colour-print in the Japanese manner, by Emil Orlik, of Prague.  E.
      796-1903(1)
   2. ORIGINAL DRAWING (not engraved) for a colour-print, showing the
      Artist’s corrections. By Utagawa Kuniyoshi (A.D. 1797-1861).  J.D.
      1008.  _Subject_—The celebrated swordsmith Sanjo Kokagi Munechika
      forging a blade in the grounds of the Inari Temple, assisted by a
      Fox-Spirit in the form of a woman.
   3. ORIGINAL DRAWING (not engraved) for a 3-sheet colour-print, showing
      the Artist’s corrections. By Hiroshige I. (A.D. 1796-1858).  J.D.
      2440 _Subject_—Street scene in Akabane, Tokyo.
   4. BRUSHES used by (Japanese) painters of the Chinese School.  E.
      4203-4206-1911.  Founded by Josetsu (2nd half of the 14th century).
      The style is still practised.
   5. BRUSHES used by painters of the Tosa School. E. 4200-4202-1911.  The
      School (the National School of Japanese Painting) was first composed
      of a number of groups, more or less related, which coalesced under
      the name of Tosa in the time of Kasuga Tsunetaka (early 13th
      century), who seems to have been the first to use this appellation.
      The style is still practised.
   6. BRUSHES used by painters of the Sesshiu School. E. 4190, 4191-1911.
      Founded by Sesshiu (1420-1506), and based on the methods of the
      Chinese painters of the Sung Dynasty (960-1280). The style is still
      practised.
   7. BRUSHES used by painters of the Kano School. E. 27-29-1913.  Founded
      by Kano Masanobu (1453-1550). The style is still practised.
   8. BRUSHES used by painters of the Maruyama and Shijo Schools
      (Naturalistic). E. 4192-4199-1911.  Founded by Okyo Maruyama
      (1733-1795); and Matsumura Goshun (1752-1811). The style is still
      practised.
   9. BRUSHES common to painters of various Schools.  E. 4207-4212-1911.
  10. BRUSHES used by painters in lacquer.  E. 4213-4232-1911.
  11. BRUSHES used for writing.  E. 170-187-1911.

                          ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐





CUTTING THE BLOCK


The engraving was invariably done by a second person and not by the
designer.

The wood used was that of the wild cherry _(Yamazakura),_ the timber of
which was not allowed to be exposed to sunshine, but was carefully
seasoned in the shade. Fig. 1 illustrates the most economical way of
cutting up logs into blocks; the harder portions of the wood—those nearer
the centre—being used for the key-blocks (see p. 10), and the softer for
the colour-blocks. When possible, wood from the same tree was used for all
the blocks in each series. The outlines of the drawing were incised with a
knife-edged graver, and the superfluous wood then hollowed out with
chisels or gouges of various form, for all practical purposes, identical
with those used by European wood-carvers. The result is an intaglio block,
the printing-surfaces alone remaining in relief.

             [DIAGRAM:—Method of cutting a log into blocks. ]

              DIAGRAM:—Method of cutting a log into blocks.


The block first made from the drawing is called the key-block _(Daiban)_
and gives, in relief, the lines only, of the design. From it a number of
proofs are taken, one for each colour-printing to be made. On each of
these proofs the separate portion of the design covered by one colour is
painted; and is then pasted on a block and cut in the manner described
above. Every part of the surface of the block, however, which is not
required for the one colour in use, is cut away.

To produce a colour print, therefore, a key-block is required and also a
separate block for each colour in the design. For the sake of economy,
colour-blocks are sometimes cut on both sides; and, for small details, two
portions of the design may be cut on one side, but only one colour is
printed at each operation.

In the actual cutting of the block, the old Japanese engraver adhered to
an important principle—that of following the direction of the brush
strokes of the original drawing, in such a manner as to reproduce the
actual quality of the brush-mark. This is less apparent in the ordinary
colour-prints; but in reproductions, by the same process, of paintings and
drawings, the results obtained are extraordinarily faithful to the
originals.

Blocks were often framed, to prevent warping, in the manner illustrated in
fig. 2. This device was more generally employed in the case of those
especially made for book-illustration. A block that had warped could often
be straightened out again, by being well soaked in water and then placed
under a weight.

        [DIAGRAM:——Method of framing a block to prevent warping. ]

         DIAGRAM:——Method of framing a block to prevent warping.


  12. ILLUSTRATION of an engraver cutting a wood-block, showing his
      position and method of holding the knife or graver _(Kogatana)_ with
      which the outlines are first incised.  A colour-print, in the
      Japanese manner, by Emil Orlik, of Prague.  E. 797-1912
  13. ILLUSTRATION of the process of making colour-prints, showing various
      stages of cutting the blocks, sharpening the tools, damping the
      paper; and the tools and materials of the printer. A 3-sheet
      colour-print, by Utagawa Kunisada, _signed_ “Toyokuni” (A.D.
      1785-1864). The process is fancifully represented as being carried
      out by women.  J. 3203.   This print is imitated from one by
      Utamaro, a portion of which is illustrated herein _(Frontispiece)._
  14. CHISELS _(Nomi)_ used in cutting the block. The outlines are first
      cut with a graver _(Kogatana)_ somewhat similar to that used by
      European wood-engravers.  E. 4333-4343-1909.
  15. STONE _(Koshito)_ for sharpening tools. E. 4345-1909.
  16. STONE _(Awasedo)_ for polishing the surface of the Koshito.  E.
      4346-1909.
  17. MALLET _(Saizuchi)_ used with tools for cutting away the superfluous
      wood.  E. 4344-1909.
  18. DIAGRAM, showing the most economical way of cutting a log into
      blocks for printing (fig. 1).
  19. DIAGRAM, showing method of framing a block to prevent warping (fig.
      2).

                          ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐





PRINTING


The Printing of the old colour-prints was done by a third person, neither
the engraver nor the designer.

The finished block must first be thoroughly washed and dried. The colour
is then applied with a brush, to the upper surface of the block, which
rests on a low stand _(Suridai)_ to which are affixed four small cushions
of wet cotton _(Yawara)_ to prevent slipping (fig. 6). This stand should
have a downward slope of about 2 inches in 1 foot. The paper is wetted,
about 6 hours before being used for printing, and hung up to drain. For
the actual printing, it is laid on the upper surface of the block,
register _(Kento)_ being secured by means of an angular cut at one corner
(Plate III.) called the “key” _(kaji)_; and a line cut at another, called
the “draw-close line” _(hikitsuki)._  No other means of adjustment is
used, but the skill of the old printers was so great that faults of
register can very seldom be observed. The impression is then rubbed off
with the _Baren,_ used with a circular or zig-zag movement (fig. 5); and
this operation is repeated in succession with each block, beginning with
the key-block, until the prints are complete.

It is the modern, and was probably the old practice, to take the required
number of proofs from each block in succession; and not to complete each
print separately. The writer has observed that a modern Japanese printer
takes an impression in from 15 to 25 seconds, without special effort.

The colours used were as follows:—

      CARMINE _(Beni)._ Made from the Safflower, Carthamus tinctorius,
      from which rouge is also prepared. The kind called _Saiku-Beni_ is
      generally mixed with an acid derived from the Plum-fruit
      _(Mukiume)._
      BLUE _(Ao)_. Both _AiroÌ_(indigo) and _Hero_ (European blue) are now
      used. The old indigo was sometimes extracted from dyed rags.
      YELLOW _(Ki)._ Generally _Zumi,_ a yellow dye, and _Kiwo,_ orpiment,
      are used, and _ShiwoÌ,_ gamboge, for the best prints.
      PURPLE _(Murasaki)._ Formerly this colour was made by mixing
      _Aigami_ (blue) and _Beni_ (red), but now an imported purple is
      used.
      GREEN _(Midori)._ A mixture of either _Hero_ and _Kiwo,_ or _Zumi_
      and _AiroÌ._
      ORANGE YELLOW   _(ToÌ-oÌ)._ Produced by mixing _Zumi_ and _Bengara_
      (iron red) or _Zumi_ and _Yenji_ (rouge).
      BLACK _(Sumi)_. _Yeizen Zumi_(lamp-black) is used with the
      key-block. It should be steeped in water for five or six months,
      then thoroughly well mixed in a wooden dish with a wooden mixer.
      _Tsuya-Zumi_ is the brilliant black used for such details as human
      hair, black lacquer objects, &c. It is obtained by the use of a
      _Dosa_ medium (mixture of glue and alum); and printed from a
      separate block.
      SILVER COLOR _(Gin-ro)._ Lead powder mixed with glue.
      GOLD COLOR _(Kin-iro)._ Brass powder mixed with glue.
      COPPER COLOR _(Akegane-iro)._ Pure copper powder mixed with glue.
      WHITE _(Shiro)._ Powered white clay _(JoÌfun)_ mixed with glue.
      Clamshell powder _(Namaguriko)_ is sometimes employed.
_      Bengara_ (IRON RED), _Tan_ (RED LEAD) and MICA are also used.

NOTE.—The above colours are those given in the _Bungei Riusan_ (see p.
22).

Great importance was attached to the grinding and mixing of the colours.
The glue-water medium used for mixing with black was made in the
proportion of about one-third of an ounce of glue to three-fourths of a
pint of water; but these proportions varied with various qualities of the
pigment or paper. In the case of other colours, glue was not always used,
but rice-paste (made with rice-flour and boiling water); the actual being
sometimes done in the process of applying the colour to the block. A
little alum was dissolved in the cold water with which the rice-paste was
mixed. A specially brilliant effect was produced by laying a light wash of
rice-paste over the block before spreading the colours.

RELIEF PRINTING.—For this purpose, a special block is made for that part
in the print where the relief is required. The print is laid _back
downwards_ on the block, in the opposite manner to that used when printing
colour, and the impression is rubbed in with a tool of ivory—the canine
teeth of the wild boar being the material most favoured.

            [DIAGRAM:—The _Baren._—Its internal construction ]

             DIAGRAM:—The _Baren._—Its internal construction


           [DIAGRAM:—The _Baren._—Position of pad in sheath. ]

             DIAGRAM:—The _Baren._—Position of pad in sheath.


                 [DIAGRAM:—The _Baren._—Method of use. ]

                   DIAGRAM:—The _Baren._—Method of use.


                       [DIAGRAM:—Printer’s Desk. ]

                         DIAGRAM:—Printer’s Desk.


  20. WORKING PROOF from the key-block, with colour added by the artist;
      and the following note in his writing, “Please gradate the colour
      like this.” The register marks are seen at the sides.  By Utagawa
      Toyokuni I. A.D. 1769-1825. _Subject_—Theatrical scene. The actors
      Nakayama Tomisaburo and Ichikawa Komazo in the parts of the Geisha
      Sankatsu and Hanshichi. _Plate_ III. J. 8494.
  21. PRINTING COLOURS. Specimens of colours as mixed by printers for use,
      in glazed earthenware bowls, with small brushes. E. 3892-3895-1910.
  22. BRUSHES made of horse-hair. The smaller brushes are used for
      applying the colour to the blocks. E. 4324-4332-1909.
  23. RUBBERS _(Baren)_ with which the print is taken.  E. 4347-4348-1909.
      These are made with bamboo sheath fibre, twisted into cord and
      coiled edgeways round a card centre; then fixed into position with
      paper string of two or three strands and paste.  This is then
      enclosed within a large soft bamboo sheath, the ends of which are
      twisted and turned upwards to make the handle.  The sheath must be
      very fine and be softened with a little oil before use.
  24. DIAGRAM, showing internal construction of the pad of the _Baren_
      (fig. 3).
  25. DIAGRAM, showing position of the pad within the sheath of the
      _Baren,_ before the ends of the latter are turned over, and twisted
      to make the handle (fig. 4).
  26. DIAGRAM, showing how the _Baren_ is held in the hand, and the line
      it follows when used (fig. 5).
  27. DIAGRAM, showing printer’s desk, with block in position, resting on
      pads of damp cotton (fig. 6).
  28. WOOD BLOCKS (7) used in the production of a colour-print by Utamaro
      II. (worked c. 1800-1840 A.D.), with a set of progressive proofs
      made by a modern Japanese printer.  E. 4316-4322-1909.

            The KEY-BLOCK, for printing the black outlines only.
            First printing from KEY-BLOCK.
            Second printing, with GREY added to proof from key-block. The
            block is also cut for the twelfth printing, GREEN.
            Fifth printing, PALE BLUE. The block is also cut for the
            fourth printing, BROWN.
            Sixth printing, BLUE PATTERN. The block is also cut for a
            printing not used.
            Seventh printing, BLUE. Eighth printing, YELLOW
            Ninth printing, GREY. Tenth printing, BROWN (second time
            used).
            Eleventh printing, BROWN PATTERN.  The block is also cut for
            the third printing, PALE PINK.
            Thirteenth printing, CRIMSON. Fourteenth printing, CRIMSON
            PATTERN.  Fifteenth printing, PURPLE.
            Sixteenth printing, BURNISHED BLACK, giving the completed
            print.

NOTE.—The above are exhibited, in a separate case, in the Museum. In the
Students’ Room is a set of proofs showing separate printings from each
block. The key-block of the above series is original; the colour-blocks
were made in the and half of the 19th century.

The Museum also possesses the following original Woodblocks.

      BAIREI, Kono (d. 1895).  Wood-blocks (4) used for a leaf of “The
      Hundred Birds.” 1881. Cut both sides. (9¼×14¼).  583-1886.
      Exhibited with an original drawing and a proof from one of the
      blocks. The Museum contains the whole of the original drawings,
      which were specially preserved, and a copy of the publication.
      BUNKEN (19th century). Key-block for a colour-print. Eagle flying
      over the sea. (9½×10 3/8)  E. 4934-1903 The back is engraved to
      print one of the colours, c. 1880.
      GAKUTEI, Harunobu _(worked_ C. 1800-1830).

            Key-block for a _Surimono._ A carp swimming upwards. (8½× 8
            3/8)  262-1903.
            Key-block for a _Surimono._ Geisha and peacock. (8¼×10).
            4946-1903.

      HARUNOBU(1724-1770). Key-blocks for a set of five book-illustrations
      by Harunobu, c. 1770. _Av. size_ (8¼×10¾). E, 2168-2172-1909.
      Presented by J. S. Happer, Esq.
      HIROSHIGE (1796-1858). Key-block for an early set of lateral prints
      by Hiroshige, entitled “Toto Meisho Saka Tsukushi-no Uchi-Yedo.”
      Series of steep roads in Yedo. Sub-title on face of print:
      “Aoizaka-no Dzu.” The reverse was used many years later for a set of
      views by Hiroshige and Toyokuni (Kunisada). (10¾×15 ½).  E.
      2166-1909. Presented by J. S. Happer, Esq.
      Key-block for a half-plate set of “Toto Meisho” (views of Yedo) by
      Hiroshige. On the reverse is one of the colour-blocks for each half.
      (15×10¼). E. 2167-1909. Presented by J. S. Happer, Esq.
      HOKKEI, Todoya ShunyoÌsai (c. 1780-1850). Key-block for a
      _Surimono._ A woman with writing materials. (8 3/8 ×8½).  261-1903.
      KAGESHIGE(19th century). Key-block for a _Surimono._ Fan and
      incense-burner, each on a stand. (9×10¼).  E. 4945-1903. The back is
      engraved to print two of the colours.
      KIKUSAI(19th century). Block for book-illustration. The three
      long-lived men—ToÌboÌsaku (9,000 years), Urashima TaroÌ (8,000
      years), and Miura-no-Osuke (106 years). (7×10½).   E. 4941-1903. On
      the back are several incomplete engravings.
      ODAKE (19th century). Wood-blocks (8) for illustrations to
      “Mitford’s Tales of Old Japan” (1871) with a set of proofs. Various
      sizes. E. 1401-1888.
      SADANOBU _(worked_ c. 1820-1840). Key-block for a colour-print.
      Daikoku and Okame wrestling before the rest of the Seven Gods of
      Good Fortune. (6½×9 3/8). E. 4942-1903. The back is engraved to
      print gold.
      SEIKA (19th century). Key-block for a colour-print. Landscape with
      Mount Fuji and Storks. (6 3/8 ×8½). E. 4936-1903.
      SUNKICHIROÌ, Shunka (19th century). Key-blocks (8) for
      book-illustration. “ZoÌshoÌ Mono-gatari.” History of Soldiers. By
      HakoÌ ShoÌbei. Published by Fusi Kiken at Kyoto, Osaka and Yedo,
      A.D. 1846, 3rd month. Cut both sides. (8×13). 381, 382, 387, 388,
      393-396-1895.
      SUGISAKI, S. _(Living Artist.)_ Engraved wood-block, showing a
      decorative design of bamboo plants: designed, engraved and printed
      by S. Sugisaki. (51×18 5/8). E. 3790-1910. A print from the above.
      E. 3790a-1910. Presented by the Artist.
      SUIKO (19th century).

            Key-block (part missing) for a colour-print of a fan-design.
            “Shiki Bijin Sugatazoroye.” Beauties representative of the
            Four Seasons. Spring. A woman of the Yoshiwara with her
            attendant (Kamuro). One of a set of four. (9×8¼). E.
            4940-1903. The back is engraved to print gold and a colour.
            Key-block (part missing) for a colour-print of a fan-design.
            Shiki Bijin Sugatazoroye. Summer. A geisha enjoying the
            evening breeze. (8¾×8). E. 4938-1903 The back is engraved to
            print one of the colours.

      UTAMARO II. _(worked_ c. 1800-1840). Wood-blocks (7) used in the
      production of a colour-print. (15×10½).  E. 4316-4322-1909.
      UNSIGNED (19th century).

            Key-block for a colour-print. Farmer turning an irrigation
            water-wheel, in rice fields. (8¾×9¾). E. 4935-1903 The back is
            engraved to print one of the colours.
            Key-block (on each side) for two colour-prints. Chrysanthemums
            and butterfly; on the back, peonies in a flower-vase (9¾×10¾).
            E. 4933-1903.

NOTE.—_Proofs were taken (in  1910), by a Japanese printer, from each of
the above, except in cases where such were already in the Collection. They
can be seen on application in the Students’ Room of the Department._

                          ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐





PAPER


Japanese paper, of the kinds used for artistic purposes, is made from the
inner bark of various plants, chiefly the _Broussonetia Papyrifera,
Edgeworthia Papyrifera_ and _Wickstrœmia Canescens._ The young shoots of
the plant are cut in the withy stage; the fibre freed from the wood, and
the skin and green parts of the bark, and edges of knot-holes and other
defective parts are cut out. The selected residuum is then laid in running
water for several days, and boiled in an iron kettle with lye, till it is
quite soft and pulpy. The pulp is next washed with fresh water until the
water runs off without discolouration. The process of dealing with this
pulp does not greatly differ in principle from the European method; except
that the scoop-net is not of wire, but of fine parallel bamboo splints or
silk net toughened with Shibu (a preparation containing a large proportion
of tannic acid). There is no watermark in Japanese paper; but patterns are
sometimes produced by arrangements of bamboo splints woven, in net
fashion, with silk or hemp thread _(Mon-shi—_patterned paper). The
Department of Engraving, Illustration and Design possesses a collection of
specimens of various Japanese papers.

The fine quality of the colours in old Japanese colour-prints is due, to a
considerable extent, to the nature of the paper and especially to its
tough but highly absorbent character.

                          ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐





BOOKS OF REFERENCE


The following works contain descriptions of the various technical
processes mentioned above.

      REIN, J. J. The Industries of Japan. (Paper, p. 389.) (10×7.)
      London, 1889.
      WASHINGTON: _U.S.A. National Museum._ Report of the Smithsonian
      Institution for the year ending 30 June, 1892. Japanese Wood-cutting
      and Wood cut Printing, by T. Tokuno. Edited and annotated by S. R.
      Koehler (p. 222). _Illustrated._ (9×9.) Washington, 1893.
      WOOD-CUT Printing in Water-colours, after the Japanese manner.
      _Illustrated._ (In _The Studio,_ vol. 3, pp. no, 144. 1894.)
      LONDON: _Victoria and Albert Museum Handbooks._ Japanese
      Colour-prints, by Edward F. Strange. (Technique, chapter xi.) 3rd
      edition. (8×6.) London, 1910.
      SAKAKIBARA, Yoshino. Bungei Riusan. Essays on Japanese literature,
      with additional chapters describing the manufacture of paper and the
      processes of printing and engraving. (The Museum copy has MS.
      translations of the portion relating to engraving.) _Cuts._ 8 vols.
      (10×7.) _ToÌkyoÌ,_1878.

NOTE.—_The Department of Engraving, Illustration and Design includes a
large collection of Japanese Colour-prints and Drawings, which can be seen
on application in the Students’ Room (Room 71) at any time (except on
Sundays) when the Museum is open to the public._

                          ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

[ORIGINAL DRAWING FOR THE SERIES OF PRINTS CALLED “THE 100 POEMS EXPLAINED
                             BY THE NURSE” ]

HOKUSAI.—Original drawing for the key-block of an unpublished colour-print
 in the series called “The Hundred Poets explained by the Nurse.” A junk,
 with straw sail, conveying three travellers; at the bow a breaking wave.
    At the top right-hand corner is a poem by Hoshoji no Nyudo Saki no
   Kwampaku Daijo Daijin.  O’er the wide sea plain, / As I row and look
   around, It appears to me / That the white waves, far away, / Are the
ever-shining sky. From a drawing in the Victoria and Albert Museum. J. D.
                                  1447.


      [WORKING PROOF OF A COLOUR-PRINT SHOWING REGISTRATION MARKS.]

    TOYOKUNI. I.—Working proof from the key-block of a colour-print. A
theatrical scene; with the actors Nakayama Tomisaburo and Ichikawa Komazo
in the parts of the Geisha Sankatsu and Hanshichi.  The artist has added a
   wash of red colour to the print, with the following MS. note to the
   printer, “Please gradate the colour like this.” From a print in the
                   Victoria and Albert Museum. J. 8494.






***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TOOLS AND MATERIALS ILLUSTRATING THE JAPANESE METHOD OF COLOUR-PRINTING
***



CREDITS


December 17, 2013

            Project Gutenberg edition 10
            Martin Schub



A WORD FROM PROJECT GUTENBERG


This file should be named 44458‐0.txt or 44458‐0.zip.

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:


    http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/4/4/4/5/44458/


Updated editions will replace the previous one — the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the Project
Gutenberg™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered
trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you
receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of
this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given away
— you may do practically _anything_ with public domain eBooks.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”),
you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™
License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.


General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works


1.A.


By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work,
you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the
terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright)
agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this
agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee
for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work
and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may
obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set
forth in paragraph 1.E.8.


1.B.


“Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or
associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be
bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can
do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying
with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are
a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you
follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.


1.C.


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation” or
PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual
work is in the public domain in the United States and you are located in
the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying,
distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on
the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of
course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of
promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project
Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for
keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can
easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you
share it without charge with others.


1.D.


The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you
can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant
state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of
your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before
downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating
derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of
any work in any country outside the United States.


1.E.


Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:


1.E.1.


The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access
to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear prominently whenever
any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on which the phrase
“Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg”
is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or
distributed:


    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org


1.E.2.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from the
public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with
permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and
distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or
charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you
must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7
or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.3.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted with the
permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply
with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed
by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project
Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the permission of the
copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.


1.E.4.


Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License
terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any
other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.


1.E.5.


Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic
work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying
the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate
access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg™ License.


1.E.6.


You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed,
marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word
processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted
on the official Project Gutenberg™ web site (http://www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form.
Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg™ License as
specified in paragraph 1.E.1.


1.E.7.


Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing,
copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless you comply
with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.8.


You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that

    - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
      the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you
      already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to
      the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to
      donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60
      days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally
      required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments
      should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4,
      “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
      Archive Foundation.”

    - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
      you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
      does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License.
      You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
      works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and
      all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.

    - You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
      any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
      electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
      receipt of the work.

    - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
      distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.


1.E.9.


If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic
work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this
agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael Hart, the owner of the
Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in
Section 3 below.


1.F.


1.F.1.


Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to
identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread public domain
works in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these
efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they
may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to,
incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright
or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk
or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot
be read by your equipment.


1.F.2.


LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES — Except for the “Right of
Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™
trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™
electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for
damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE
NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH
OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3. YOU AGREE THAT THE
FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT
WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL,
PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY
OF SUCH DAMAGE.


1.F.3.


LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND — If you discover a defect in this
electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund
of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to
the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a
physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect
to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the
work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose
to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in
lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a
refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.


1.F.4.


Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in
paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ’AS-IS,’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.


1.F.5.


Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the
exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or
limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state
applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make
the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state
law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement
shall not void the remaining provisions.


1.F.6.


INDEMNITY — You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark
owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and
any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs
and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from
any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of
this or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any Defect
you cause.


Section  2.


           Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™


Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic
works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including
obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the
efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks
of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance
they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring
that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for
generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for
Project Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn more about the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations
can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation web page at
http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.


   Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of
Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service.
The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf. Contributions to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full
extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr.
S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809 North
1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact information
can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official page at
http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:


    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.


  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
                                Foundation


Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the
number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment
including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are
particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable
effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these
requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not
received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or
determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have
not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against
accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us
with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the
United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation methods
and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including
checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please
visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.


      General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg™
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with
anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg™
eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed editions,
all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless a copyright
notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance
with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook’s eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII, compressed
(zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over the
old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:


    http://www.gutenberg.org


This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg™, including how
to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation,
how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email
newsletter to hear about new eBooks.






***FINIS***
