The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Rt. Hon. John Bright M.P.; Cartoons
from the Collection of "Mr. Punch", by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Rt. Hon. John Bright M.P.; Cartoons from the Collection of "Mr. Punch"

Author: Various

Release Date: December 29, 2013 [EBook #44539]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RT. HON. JOHN BRIGHT M.P. ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Charlie Howard, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)









[Illustration: CARTOON.--FEBRUARY 2, 1867.

GLADIATORS PREPARING FOR THE ARENA.

The Conservative Reform Bill was to be the principal measure of the
approaching Session, and as the question had proved a fatal one to the
Whig Administration in the preceding year there was every prospect of a
keenly contested struggle.--1867.

No. 30. _Frontispiece._]




    THE RT. HON.
    JOHN BRIGHT
    M.P.

    [Illustration]

    Cartoons from the Collection of
    “MR. PUNCH.”

    PUNCH OFFICE, 85, FLEET STREET, LONDON.
    1878.




    LONDON:
    BRADBURY, AGNEW, & CO., PRINTERS, WHITEFRIARS.




The Rt. Hon. John Bright, M.P.


Son of Jacob Bright, of Greenbank, Rochdale, Lancashire; born in 1811;
one of the firm of John Bright and Brothers, cotton spinners and
manufacturers, Rochdale; a member of the Society of Friends; joined the
Anti-Corn-Law League soon after its formation in 1838, and, with Mr.
Cobden, became one of its leading members, and the powerful champion
of Free Trade; returned to Parliament for the city of Durham in 1843,
and continued to sit as its representative till 1847, when he was
elected for Manchester; opposed the war with Russia, 1854; rejected at
Manchester at the General Election in 1857, consequent on the defeat
of Lord Palmerston’s Government on the China question; returned for
Birmingham the same year, and is still member for that constituency;
the great advocate of Free Trade, Financial Reform, a wide extension of
the Suffrage, a redistribution of Seats and the Ballot, of the cause of
Ireland and India, of National Education, and of Peace; in the American
Civil War took the Anti-Slavery side, and was the staunch supporter of
the Northern States; visited Ireland in 1866; accepted a post in Mr.
Gladstone’s Cabinet in 1868 as President of the Board of Trade--the
state of his health prevented him from undertaking the duties of the
India Office--when he was nominated a Privy Councillor; resigned office
at the end of 1870; on his health becoming more satisfactory, he
returned to the Gladstone Cabinet in 1873, as Chancellor of the Duchy
of Lancaster, but retired with his colleagues at the beginning of the
following year.

Mr. Bright is one of the most eloquent and effective orators of his
time, and his speeches were collected and published in 1868; the policy
which he has for so many years advocated has in most points been in the
end accepted by the nation.




A LIST OF THE CARTOONS.


  YEAR.                                                            NO.

         _Acrobats at Westminster_                             _Title_

  1846.  _The Seven-League Boots_                                    1

  1849.  _A Bright Idea_                                             2

  1852.  “_Not Quite such a Fine Child as the Last!_”                3

    ”    _Eating the Leek_                                           4

  1854.  _Pet of the Manchester School_                              5

  1855.  _The New Coalition_                                         6

  1857.  _Recoil of the great Chinese Gun-Trick_                     7

  1858.  _Orestes pursued by the Furies_                             8

    ”    “_It will soon Boil!_”                                      9

    ”    _Mr. Bright offers to give Satisfaction to the Liberal
             Party_                                                 10

  1859.  _A Very Greasy Pole_                                       11

    ”    _The Quaker and the Bauble_                                12

    ”    _Who will Rouse Him?_                                      13

    ”    _The Real Ugly Rush_                                       14

  1860.  _The Reform Janus_                                         15

    ”    _Bright the Peace-Maker_                                   16

    ”    _Dissent in Earnest_                                       17

  1863.  _Cobden’s Logic_                                           18

  1865.  _Dr. Bright and his Patient_                               19

    ”    _The Political “Wall-Flower”_                              20

  1865.  _John Slow and John Fast_                                  21

    ”    _Scene from St. Stephen’s Pantomime_                       22

  1866.  _The Officious Passenger_                                  23

    ”    _Going Down to the House_                                  24

    ”    _The Brummagem Frankenstein_                               25

    ”    _The Popular Poll-Parrot_                                  26

    ”    _Dr. Dulcamara in Dublin_                                  27

    ”    _The Festive Season_                                       28

  1867.  _Rival Sweepers_                                           29

    ”    _Gladiators Preparing for the Arena_ (_Frontispiece_)      30

  1868.  _Dr. Bull’s Waiting-Room_                                  31

    ”    _Athletics at Westminster_                                 32

    ”    _A Dress Rehearsal_                                        33

    ”    _A “Friend” at Court_                                      34

  1869.  “_Rejected!_”                                              35

    ”    _Forgetting his Place_                                     36

  1870.  _John Bright’s New Reform Bill--“Reform Yourselves”_       37

    ”    _The Bill of Fare_                                         38

  1872.  “_Off Greenwich_”                                          39

  1873.  _A Friend in Need_                                         40

  1875.  _The New Shepherd_                                         41




    THE RT. HON.
    JOHN BRIGHT,
    M.P.

    CARTOONS FROM “PUNCH.”
    1846-1875.


[Illustration: CARTOON.--MARCH 7, 1846.

THE SEVEN-LEAGUE BOOTS;

OR, DEATH OF GIANT MONOPOLY.

The labours of Messrs. Cobden and Bright procured the recognition of
Free Trade principles, and, with Sir Robert Peel, extorted from a
reluctant Parliament the repeal of the Corn Laws.--1846.

No. 1.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--NOVEMBER 17, 1849.

A _BRIGHT_ IDEA.

THE PEACE RECRUITING SERGEANT TRYING TO ENLIST THE DUKE.

Mr. Bright’s peace principles were embodied in the plan proposed this
year to settle all international differences by arbitration. The scheme
was not viewed with much favour.--1849.

No. 2.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--FEBRUARY 21, 1852.

“NOT QUITE SUCH A FINE CHILD AS THE LAST!”

Lord John Russell’s second Reform Bill was coldly received by Mr.
Bright and other ardent reformers. The Ministry fell shortly after its
introduction, and the measure was never discussed.--1852.

No. 3.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--NOVEMBER 13, 1852.

EATING THE LEEK.

    FLUELLEN ... MR. COBDEN.      PISTOL ... MR. DISRAELI.

FLUELLEN. “_I pray you fall to; if you can mock a leek, you can eat a
leek._”-HEN. V.

The Derby Ministry declared their adherence to the Free-trade Policy of
Messrs. Cobden and Bright, which they had formerly resisted.--1852.

No. 4.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--APRIL 18, 1854.

PET OF THE MANCHESTER SCHOOL.

“_He shall have a little Turk to pull to pieces--that he shall._”

Messrs. Bright and Cobden incurred much odium by their persistent
opposition to the Anti-Russian feeling of the nation at the outbreak of
the Crimean war.--1854.

No. 5.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--OCTOBER 27, 1855.

THE NEW COALITION.

Messrs. Bright, Gladstone, and Disraeli were, at this time (though for
different reasons) in accord in their opposition to Lord Palmerston’s
Government.--1855.

No. 6.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--APRIL 11, 1857.

RECOIL OF THE GREAT CHINESE GUN-TRICK.

Mr. Bright was rejected at Manchester on Lord Palmerston’s appeal
to the country after his defeat by Mr. Cobden on the China
Question. He was shortly afterwards returned for Birmingham without
opposition.--1857.

No. 7.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--JUNE 19, 1858.

ORESTES PURSUED BY THE FURIES.

Mr. Bright and Mr. Roebuck supported the Conservative Ministry, then
threatened by a vote of censure, mainly to prevent Lord Palmerston’s
return to office.--1858.

No. 8.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--NOVEMBER 6, 1858.

“IT WILL SOON BOIL!”

The constituencies at this time were apathetic on the Reform Question.
Mr. Bright had been addressing numerous Meetings to elicit popular
support.--1858.

No. 9.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--DECEMBER 18, 1858.

MR. BRIGHT OFFERS TO GIVE SATISFACTION TO THE LIBERAL PARTY.

Mr. Bright rejected the timid Reform proposals of the Whigs, and
demanded the widest extension of the franchise.--1858.

No. 10.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--JANUARY 29, 1859.

A VERY GREASY POLE.

Mr. Bright had been addressing large Meetings in the manufacturing
districts to agitate for an extension of the franchise to all rated
householders.--1859.

No. 11.]


[Illustration: CARTOON--FEBRUARY 5, 1859.

THE QUAKER AND THE BAUBLE.

“_It is the Land which the territorial party represents in Parliament.
* * * That is the theory of the Constitution_: BLACKSTONE _says so. But
it is a thing which is not likely to be respected much longer, and it
mus’ go, even if involving the destruction of the Constitution._”--MR.
BRIGHT, in his Penny Organ.

The “Morning Star”--a journal founded to advocate the views of Mr.
Bright--met with little support. After an uncertain existence of some
years, it was discontinued.--1859.

No. 12.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--MARCH 12, 1859.

WHO WILL ROUSE HIM?

Mr. Bright’s pertinacious demand for a Reform Bill, and the endeavours
of both political parties to settle the question, failed to awaken the
indifference of the constituencies.--1859.

No. 13.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--APRIL 30, 1859.

THE REAL UGLY RUSH.

“_He feared there would be an ugly rush some of these days._”--MR.
HENLEY on the Reform Bill.

The Reform Question had become for both parties a battle ground for the
possession of the Treasury bench. It proved fatal to the Derby Ministry
in the preceding month.--1859.

No. 14.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--MAY 5, 1860.

THE REFORM JANUS.

{To Mr. Bright: “Just the thing you want my dear Bright: double your
constituency!”

To a Conservative: “Pray don’t be alarmed!--It Only adds one per cent
to the franchise!”}

Lord John Russell’s new Reform proposals, though framed with great
care, again failed to receive Mr. Bright’s approval, and were at the
same time distasteful to the Conservative Party.--1860.

No. 15.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--JUNE 9, 1860.

BRIGHT THE PEACE-MAKER.

Mr. Bright took an active part in supporting the repeal of the Paper
Duty. He condemned the action of the Upper House in rejecting the Bill,
and charged them with usurping the powers properly belonging to the
Commons.--1860.

No. 16.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--JULY 21, 1860.

DISSENT IN EARNEST.

“_We defer to their feelings, but we cannot assent to their
reasoning._”--PARL. DEBATE.

Mr. Bright’s forcible opposition influenced the Government in
withdrawing from the Census Bill the invidious clause relating to the
Statistics of Religious Denominations.--1860.

No. 17.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--DECEMBER 5, 1863.

{Well-dressed Mr. Cobden to poorly-dressed beggar: “You are the
greatest booby in the Universe, and therefore you ought to have a vote.”

Mr. Bright: “Hear! Hear!”}

COBDEN’S LOGIC.

“_I don’t know, perhaps, any country in the world where the_ MASSES OF
THE PEOPLE ARE SO ILLITERATE AS IN ENGLAND. * * * _Sound Statesmanship
requires such an extension of the franchise as shall admit the Masses
of the People to political power._”--From MR. COBDEN’S Speech at
Rochdale.

This speech gave occasion to much angry comment, and led to a personal
dispute between Mr. Cobden and the Editor of the _Times_.--1863.

No. 18.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--FEBRUARY 4, 1865.

DR. BRIGHT AND HIS PATIENT.

DOCTOR. “_Do you get good wages?_”

PATIENT. “_Yes._”

DOCTOR. “_Have you plenty to eat and drink?_”

PATIENT. “_Yes, as far as that goes._”

DOCTOR. “_Do you do as you like?_”

PATIENT. “_Yes._”

DOCTOR. “_Do you pay taxes?_”

PATIENT. “_None to hurt me much._”

DOCTOR. “_Ah! We must change all that. We must go in for_ REFORM!”

This colloquy gives a not unfair summary of Mr. Bright’s address to his
constituents in the preceding month.--1865.

No. 19.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--NOVEMBER 25, 1865.

{Lord Russell to another woman: “Will you join our set Miss Goshen?”}

THE POLITICAL “WALL-FLOWER.”

MISS BRIGHT. “_Nobody asks_ ME; _and if they did, I should certainly
decline._”

Lord Russell’s Whig prejudices were too strong to permit his offering
Mr. Bright a seat in the Cabinet--though none had better deserved
it.--1865.

No. 20.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--DECEMBER 9, 1865.

JOHN SLOW AND JOHN FAST.

EARL RUSSELL. “_Well, well! Don’t be violent, Mr. Bright, and proper
inquiries shall be made, as we have perfect confidence in our friend,
Mr. Workingman._”

Lord Russell claimed to have a monopoly of the Reform Question, and was
not prepared to make the violent changes demanded by Mr. Bright.--1865.

No. 21.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--DECEMBER 30, 1865.

SCENE FROM ST. STEPHEN’S PANTOMIME.

CLOWN (MR. BR-GHT). “_What a beautiful child! Let me take care of it
for yer, mum._”

The Ministry were deaf alike to Mr. Bright’s menaces and persuasions,
and their Bill, as ultimately framed, did not contain any of the points
for which he contended.--1865.

No. 22.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--JANUARY 20, 1866.

{Mr. Bright using speaking trumpet: “LOWER AWAY THERE LOWER AWAY”}

THE OFFICIOUS PASSENGER.

LORD JOHN. “_Excuse me, friend Bright, but do you command this ship, or
do I?_”

Mr. Bright not having been admitted to the Cabinet, was endeavouring
from the platform to force the hands of the Ministry.--1866.

No. 23.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--FEBRUARY 10, 1866.

GOING DOWN TO THE HOUSE.

LORD RUSSELL. “_Well, Bright, what do you want?_”

JOHNNY BRIGHT. “_Anything your Honour is willing to give me_ NOW.”

Mr. Bright was now prepared to accept any reduction of the
franchise--being convinced that neither the Ministry nor Parliament
would agree to a Radical measure.--1866.

No. 24.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--SEPTEMBER 8, 1866.

THE BRUMMAGEM FRANKENSTEIN.

JOHN BRIGHT. “_I have no fe--fe--fear of ma--manhood suffrage!_”

    [MR. BRIGHT’S Speech at Birmingham.

The unwillingness of Parliament to accept any measure of Reform had
aroused a wide-spread discontent amongst the working classes. A monster
gathering was held at Birmingham in August.--1866.

No. 25.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--OCTOBER 20, 1866.

{Parrot sitting on perch marked “UNIVERSAL SUFFRAGE”}

THE POPULAR POLL-PARROT.

PARROT SONG. “_Pretty democra--a--ats! Take ’em to the poll! Naughty
Bob Lowe! Schgree--e--e--yx!!!_”

Mr. Bright was now addressing Reform Meetings in various towns. The
burden of them was--an abuse of Mr. Lowe, who had aided in rejecting
Lord Russell’s measure.--1866.

No. 26.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--NOVEMBER 10, 1866.

{Mr. Bright holding bottle labelled “RADICAL REFORM”.}

DR. DULCAMARA IN DUBLIN.

Mr. Bright visited Dublin, by request, in October. His speeches were
mainly devoted to the discussion of Irish questions.--1866.

No. 27.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--DECEMBER 29, 1866.

THE FESTIVE SEASON.

(_A Pleasant, but we fear a somewhat Improbable, Picture._)

MR. B * * * * *, M.P. “_I shay Lowe, old f’la, lesh shwear ’ternal
fr’en’ship!_”

MR. L * * *, M.P. “_All right, Johnny. Been boshe in the wrong._”

Not so improbable after all. Within two years from this date Messrs.
Bright and Lowe were colleagues in the same Cabinet.--1866.

No. 28.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--JANUARY 12, 1867.

RIVAL SWEEPERS.

GENERAL CHORUS. “_Clear yer door-step down, mum?_”

All parties were pledged to a renewal of the Reform discussion in
the approaching Session. There was, therefore, every prospect of an
animated rivalry.--1867.

No. 29.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--FEBRUARY 15, 1868.

DR. BULL’S WAITING-ROOM.

BENJAMIN (_to_ HIBERNIA). “_Please’m, the doctor’ll take your case
fust’m._”

Mr. Bright’s further agitation of the Reform Question was (for the
present) arrested by that of the Irish Church, which was uppermost in
the minds of the country.--1868.

No. 31.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--JULY 11, 1868.

ATHLETICS AT WESTMINSTER.

JOHN BRIGHT. “_Ha! Won’t you ketch it next half when our big brother
comes!!!_”

Mr. Gladstone’s Irish Church Suspensory Bill was thrown out by the
Lords. The “big brother” was the Borough constituencies enlarged by the
New Reform Bill.--1868.

No. 32.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--SEPTEMBER 12, 1868.

A DRESS REHEARSAL.

FRIEND BRIGHT. “_H’m! Ha! Verily these Ministerial garments won’t be so
unbecoming, after all!_”

    [Said, in other words, in his last address.]

The Leadership of the Liberal Party having escaped from the hands of
the Whigs, made it more than probable that Mr. Bright would have a seat
in their next Cabinet.--1868.

No. 33.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--DECEMBER 19, 1868.

A “FRIEND” AT COURT.

WHAT WE HAVE READ. “_Mr. Bright attended yesterday at Windsor, and
kissed Her Majesty’s hand on his appointment to the Board of Trade._”

The defeat of the Conservatives at the General Election was followed
by the formation of a Liberal Administration, in which Mr. Bright was
included as President of the Board of Trade.--1868.

No. 34.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--MAY 8, 1869.

“REJECTED!”

OR, THE VICISSITUDES OF _ART_.

Mr. Bright’s long advocacy of the Irish Church Disestablishment, after
being in principle rejected alike by all Administrations, was now
successfully realized.--1869.

No. 35.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--JUNE 26, 1869.

FORGETTING HIS PLACE.

JOHN BRIGHT. “_Irish Church coming down!--pull out o’ the way there
with that ‘infatuated’ old machine of yours--can’t yer?_”

GROOM OF THE CHAMBERS. “_John, John, you’re_ FORGETTING YOUR
PLACE--_you mustn’t use that sort of language_ NOW.”

Mr. Bright’s characteristic disregard of the Upper House had been
unwisely expressed in a published letter to his constituents.--1869.

No. 36.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--JANUARY 22, 1870.

JOHN BRIGHT’S NEW REFORM BILL.--

“REFORM YOURSELVES!”

Mr. Bright addressed his constituents on the evils of the Liquor
traffic; urging, that it was a question--not for Government, but for
themselves.--1870.

No. 37.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--FEBRUARY 5, 1870.

THE BILL OF FARE.

MR. GLADSTONE (THE “CHEF”). “_Irish stew first, Mrs. B., and then----_”

MRS. BRIGHT (THE COOK). “_Lor bless you, Mr. G., the Irish stew’s quite
as much as they’ll get through, I’ll be bound!_”

Commenting on the difficulty of passing several important measures
in one Session, Mr. Bright had said, “It was not easy to drive six
omnibuses abreast through Temple Bar.”--1870.

No. 38.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--JANUARY 13, 1872.

“OFF GREENWICH.”

JOHN BRIGHT. “_Come aboard, sir!_”

CAPTAIN GLADSTONE. “_Glad to see you, John. Glad you’re A.B. again. If
it comes on to blow, we may want your assistance._”

Mr. Bright had withdrawn from the Ministry on account of ill-health.
His re-appearance in Parliament tended to strengthen the now weakened
Administration.--1872.

No. 39.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--OCTOBER 11, 1873.

A FRIEND IN NEED.

MR. GLADSTONE. “_My dear John, I congratulate you! Just in time to
settle accounts with our black friend yonder!_”

JOHN BRIGHT. “_H’m! Fighting is not quite in my line, as thee knowest,
friend William; nevertheless----!_”

Several important changes had been made with the view of strengthening
the Cabinet. Amongst others, Mr. Bright again accepted office as
Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster. The Ashantee War was now in
progress.--1873.

No. 40.]


[Illustration: CARTOON.--FEBRUARY 13, 1875.

THE NEW SHEPHERD.

HARTINGTON (_new hand, just taken on_). “_Hey, but measter!_--WHERE BE
THE SHEEP?”

Mr. Bright’s nomination of Lord Hartington as Leader of the shattered
Liberal Party was acquiesced in by the rival candidates.--1875.

No. 41.]




Transcriber’s Notes:


Dialog in some cartoons is shown in {curly braces}; descriptions
accompanying such dialog were added by Transcriber.

Cartoon 22: “Mr. Br-ght” was printed with the hyphen in place of “i”.








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Rt. Hon. John Bright M.P.;
Cartoons from the Collection o, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RT. HON. JOHN BRIGHT M.P. ***

***** This file should be named 44539-0.txt or 44539-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/4/5/3/44539/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Charlie Howard, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
