Project Gutenberg's Troy and its Remains, by Henry (Heinrich) Schliemann

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Troy and its Remains

Author: Henry (Heinrich) Schliemann

Editor: Philip Smith

Release Date: March 23, 2014 [EBook #45190]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TROY AND ITS REMAINS ***




Produced by Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images available at The Internet Archive)
with special thanks to Stephen Rowland for help with the Greek.








[Illustration: PLATE I.

VIEW OF HISSARLIK FROM THE NORTH.

_Frontispiece._

After the Excavations.]




TROY
AND ITS REMAINS;

A NARRATIVE OF RESEARCHES AND DISCOVERIES
MADE ON THE SITE OF ILIUM,
AND IN THE TROJAN PLAIN.

BY DR. HENRY SCHLIEMANN.

_Translated with the Author’s Sanction._

EDITED
BY PHILIP SMITH, B.A.,

AUTHOR OF THE ‘HISTORY OF THE ANCIENT WORLD,’ AND OF THE
‘STUDENT’S ANCIENT HISTORY OF THE EAST.’

WITH MAP, PLANS, VIEWS, AND CUTS,
_REPRESENTING 500 OBJECTS OF ANTIQUITY DISCOVERED ON THE SITE_.

LONDON:
JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET.
NEW YORK:
SCRIBNER, WELFORD, AND ARMSTRONG.
1875.




PREFACE BY THE EDITOR.


Dr. Schliemann’s original narrative of his wonderful discoveries on the
spot marked as the site of Homer’s ILIUM by an unbroken tradition, from
the earliest historic age of Greece, has a permanent value and interest
which can scarcely be affected by the final verdict of criticism on the
result of his discoveries. If he has indeed found the fire-scathed ruins
of the city whose fate inspired the immortal first-fruits of Greek
poetry, and brought to light many thousands of objects illustrating the
race, language, and religion of her inhabitants, their wealth and
civilization, their instruments and appliances for peaceful life and
war; and if, in digging out these remains, he has supplied the missing
link, long testified by tradition as well as poetry, between the famous
Greeks of history and their kindred in the East; no words can describe
the interest which must ever belong to the first birth of such a
contribution to the history of the world. Or should we, on the other
hand, in the face of all that has been revealed on the very spot of
which the Greeks themselves believed that Homer sang, lean to the
scepticism of the scholar who still says:--“I know as yet of one Ilion
only, that is, the Ilion as sung by Homer, which is not likely to be
found in the trenches of Hissarlik, but rather among the Muses who dwell
on Olympus;” even so a new interest of historic and antiquarian
curiosity would be excited by “the splendid ruins,” as the same high
authority rightly calls those “which Dr. Schliemann has brought to
light at Hissarlik.” For what, in that case, were the _four cities_,
whose successive layers of ruins, still marked by the fires that have
passed over them in turn, are piled to the height of fifty feet above
the old summit of the hill? If not even one of them is TROY, what is the
story, so like that of Troy, which belongs to them?

    “Trojæ renascens alite lugubri
     Fortuna tristi clade iterabitur.”

What is the light that is struggling to break forth from the varied mass
of evidence, and the half-deciphered inscriptions, that are still
exercising the ingenuity of the most able enquirers? Whatever may be the
true and final answer to these questions--and we have had to put on
record a signal proof that the most sanguine investigators will be
content with no answer short of the truth[1]--the vivid narrative
written by the discoverer on the spot can never lose that charm which
Renan has so happily described as “la charme des origines.”

The Editor may be permitted to add, what the Author might not say, that
the work derives another charm from the spirit that prompted the labours
which it records. It is the work of an enthusiast in a cause which, in
our “practical” age, needs all the zeal of its remaining devotees, the
cause of learning for its own sake. But, in this case, enthusiasm has
gone hand in hand with the practical spirit in its best form. Dr.
Schliemann judged rightly in prefixing to his first work the simple
unaffected record of that discipline in adversity and self-reliance,
amidst which he at once educated himself and obtained the means of
gratifying his ardent desire to throw new light on the highest problems
of antiquity, _at his own expense_. His readers ought to know that,
besides other large contributions to the cause of learning, the cost of
his excavations at Hissarlik alone has amounted to 10,000_l._; and this
is in no sense the speculative investment of an explorer, for he has
expressed the firm resolution to _give away_ his collection, and not to
_sell_ it.

Under this sense of the high and lasting value of Dr. Schliemann’s work,
the present translation has been undertaken, with the object of laying
the narrative before English readers in a form considerably improved
upon the original. For this object the Editor can safely say, on behalf
of the Publisher and himself, that no pains and cost have been spared;
and Dr. Schliemann has contributed new materials of great value.

The original work[2] was published, at the beginning of this year, as an
octavo volume, accompanied by a large quarto “Atlas” of 217 photographic
plates, containing a Map, Plans, and Views of the Plain of Troy, the
Hill of Hissarlik, and the excavations, with representations of upwards
of 4000 objects selected from the 100,000 and more brought to light by
Dr. Schliemann, which were elaborately described in the letter-press
pages of the Atlas. The photographs were taken for the most part from
drawings; and Dr. Schliemann is the first to acknowledge that their
execution left much to be desired. Many of his original plans and
drawings have been placed at our disposal; and an especial
acknowledgment is due both to Dr. Schliemann and Monsieur Émile Burnouf,
the Director of the French School at Athens, for the use of the
admirable drawings of the terra-cotta _whorls_ and _balls_ made by M.
Burnouf and his accomplished daughter. A selection of about 200 of these
objects, which are among the most interesting of Dr. Schliemann’s
discoveries, occupies the 32 lithographic plates at the end of this
volume. With the exception of the first three Plates (XXI.-XXIII.),
which are copied from the Atlas, in order to give a general view of the
_sections_ of the whorls and the chief _types_ of the patterns upon
them, all the rest are engraved from M. Burnouf’s drawings. They are
given in the _natural size_, and each whorl is accompanied by its
section. The _depth_ at which each object was found among the layers of
_débris_ is a matter of such moment (as will be seen from Dr.
Schliemann’s work) that the Editor felt bound to undertake the great
labour of identifying each with the representation of the same object in
the Atlas, where the depth is marked, to which, unfortunately, the
drawings gave no reference. The few whorls that remain unmarked with
their depth have either escaped this repeated search, or are not
represented in the Atlas. The elaborate descriptions of the material,
style of workmanship, and supposed meanings of the patterns, which M.
Burnouf has inscribed on most of his drawings, are given in the “List of
Illustrations.” The explanations of the patterns are, of course, offered
only as conjectures, possessing the value which they derive from M.
Burnouf’s profound knowledge of Aryan antiquities. Some of the
explanations of the patterns are Dr. Schliemann’s; and the Editor has
added a few descriptions, based on a careful attempt to analyze and
arrange the patterns according to distinct types. Most of these types
are exhibited on Plates XXII. and XXIII.

The selection of the 300 illustrations inserted in the body of the work
has been a matter of no ordinary labour. One chief point, in which the
present work claims to be an improvement on the original, is the
exhibition of the most interesting objects in Dr. Schliemann’s
collection in their proper relation to the descriptions in his text. The
work of selection from 4000 objects, great as was the care it required,
was the smallest part of the difficulty. It is no disparagement to Dr.
Schliemann to recognize the fact that, amidst his occupations at the
work through the long days of spring and summer, and with little
competent help save from Madame Schliemann’s enthusiasm in the cause,
the objects thrown on his hands from day to day could only be arranged
and depicted very imperfectly. The difficulty was greatly enhanced by a
circumstance which should be noticed in following the order of Dr.
Schliemann’s work. It differed greatly from that of his forerunners in
the modern enterprise of penetrating into the mounds that cover the
primeval cities of the world. When, for example, we follow Layard into
the mound of Nimrud, and see how the rooms of the Assyrian palaces
suddenly burst upon him, with their walls lined with sculptured and
inscribed slabs, we seem almost to be reading of Aladdin’s descent into
the treasure-house of jewels. But Schliemann’s work consisted in a
series of transverse cuttings, which laid open sections of the various
strata, from the present surface of the hill to the virgin soil. The
work of one day would often yield objects from almost all the strata;
and each successive trench repeated the old order, more or less, from
the remains of Greek Ilium to those of the first settlers on the hill.
The marvel is that Dr. Schliemann should have been able to preserve any
order at all, rather than that he was obliged to abandon the attempt in
the later Plates of his Atlas (see p. 225); and special thanks are due
for his care in continuing to note the depths of all the objects found.
This has often given the clue to our search, amidst the mixed objects of
a similar nature on the photographic Plates, for those which he
describes in his text, where the figures referred to by Plate and Number
form the exception rather than the rule. We believe that the cases in
which we have failed to find objects really worth representing, or in
which an object named in the text may have been wrongly identified in
the Plates, are so few as in no way to affect the value of the work. How
much, on the other hand, its value is increased by the style in which
our illustrations have been engraved, will be best seen by a comparison
with the photographic Plates. It should be added that the present work
contains all the illustrations that are now generally accessible, as the
Atlas is out of print, and the negatives are understood to be past
further use.

Twelve of the views (Plates II., III., IV., V., VI., VII. A and B, IX.,
X., XI. A and B, and XII., besides the Great Altar, No. 188) were
engraved by Mr. Whymper; all the other views and cuts by Mr. James D.
Cooper; and the lithographed map, plans, and plates of whorls and balls
by Messrs. Cooper and Hodson. In the description appended to each
engraving all that is valuable in the letter-press to the Atlas has been
incorporated, and the depth at which the object was found is added. Some
further descriptions of the Plates are given in the “List of
Illustrations.”

The text of Dr. Schliemann’s work has been translated by Miss L. Dora
Schmitz, and revised throughout by the Editor. The object kept in view
has been a faithful rendering of the Memoirs, in all the freshness due
to their composition on the spot during the progress of the work. That
mode of composition, it is true, involved not a few of those mistakes
and contradictions on matters of opinion, due to the novelty and the
rapid progress of the discoveries, which Dr. Schliemann has confessed
and explained at the opening of his work (see p. 12). To have attempted
a systematic correction and harmonizing of such discrepancies would have
deprived the work of all its freshness, and of much of its value as a
series of landmarks in the history of Dr. Schliemann’s researches, from
his first firm conviction that Troy was to be sought in the Hill of
Hissarlik, to his discovery of the “Scæan Gate” and the “Treasure of
Priam.” The Author’s final conclusions are summed up by himself in the
“Introduction;” and the Editor has thought it enough to add to those
statements, which seemed likely to mislead the reader for a time,
references to the places where the correction may be found. On one point
he has ventured a little further. All the earlier chapters are affected
by the opinion, that the lowest remains on the native rock were those of
the Homeric Troy, which Dr. Schliemann afterwards recognized in the
stratum next above. To avoid perpetual reference to this change of
opinion, the Editor has sometimes omitted or toned down the words “Troy”
and “Trojan” as applied to the _lowest stratum_, and, both in the
“Contents” and running titles, and in the descriptions of the
Illustrations, he has throughout applied those terms to the discoveries
in the _second stratum_, in accordance with Dr. Schliemann’s ultimate
conclusion.

In a very few cases the Editor has ventured to correct what seemed to
him positive errors.[3] He has not deemed it any part of his duty to
discuss the Author’s opinions or to review his conclusions. He has,
however, taken such opportunities as suggested themselves, to set Dr.
Schliemann’s statements in a clearer light by a few illustrative
annotations. Among the rest, the chief passages cited from Homer are
quoted in full, with Lord Derby’s translation, and others have been
added (out of many more which have been noted), as suggesting remarkable
coincidences with the objects found by Dr. Schliemann.

From the manner in which the work was composed, and the great importance
attached by Dr. Schliemann to some leading points of his argument, it
was inevitable that there should be some repetitions, both in the
Memoirs themselves, and between them and the Introduction. These the
Editor has rather endeavoured to abridge than completely to remove. To
have expunged them from the Memoirs would have deprived these of much of
the interest resulting from the discussions which arose out of the
discoveries in their first freshness; to have omitted them from the
Introduction would have marred the completeness of the Author’s summary
of his results. The few repetitions left standing are a fair measure of
the importance which the Author assigns to the points thus insisted on.
A very few passages have been omitted for reasons that would be evident
on a reference to the original; but none of these omissions affect a
single point in Dr. Schliemann’s discoveries.

The _measures_, which Dr. Schliemann gives with the minutest care
throughout his work, have been preserved and converted from the French
metric standard into English measures. This has been done with great
care, though in such constant conversion some errors must of course have
crept in; and _approximate_ numbers have often been given to avoid the
awkwardness of fractions, where _minute_ accuracy seemed needless. In
many cases both the French and English measures are given, not only
because Dr. Schliemann gives both (as he often does), but for another
sufficient reason. A chief key to the significance of the discoveries is
found in the _depths_ of the successive _strata_ of remains, which are
exhibited in the form of a diagram on page 10. The numbers which express
these in _Meters_[4] are so constantly used by Dr. Schliemann, and are
so much simpler than the English equivalents, that they have been kept
as a sort of “memory key” to the strata of remains. For the like reason,
and for simplicity-sake, the depths appended to the Illustrations are
given in meters only. The _Table of French and English Measures_ on page
56 will enable the reader to check our conversions and to make his own.
The Editor has added an Appendix, explaining briefly the present state
of the deeply interesting question concerning the _Inscriptions_ which
have been traced on some of the objects found by Dr. Schliemann.

With these explanations the Editor might be content to leave the work to
the judgment of scholars and of the great body of educated persons, who
have happily been brought up in the knowledge and love of Homer’s
glorious poetry, “the tale of Troy divine,” and of

    “Immortal Greece, dear land of glorious lays.”

Long may it be before such training is denied to the imagination of the
young, whether on the low utilitarian ground, or on the more specious
and dangerous plea of making it the select possession of the few who can
acquire it “thoroughly":

    Νήπιοι, οὐκ ἴσασιν ὅσῳ πλέον ἥμισυ παντός.

To attempt a discussion of the results of Dr. Schliemann’s discoveries
would be alike beyond the province of an Editor, and premature in the
present state of the investigation. The criticisms called forth both in
England and on the Continent, during the one year that has elapsed since
the publication of the work, are an earnest of the more than ten years’
duration of that new War of Troy for which it has given the signal. The
English reader may obtain some idea of the points that have been brought
under discussion by turning over the file of the “_Academy_” for the
year, not to speak of many reviews of Schliemann’s work in other
periodicals and papers. Without plunging into these varied discussions,
it may be well to indicate briefly certain points that have been
established, some lines of research that have been opened, and some
false issues that need to be avoided.

First of all, the integrity of Dr. Schliemann in the whole matter--of
which his self-sacrificing spirit might surely have been a sufficient
pledge--and the genuineness of his discoveries, are beyond all
suspicion. We have, indeed, never seen them called in question, except
in what appears to be an effusion of spite from a Greek, who seems to
envy a German his discoveries on the Greek ground which Greeks have
neglected for fifteen centuries.[5] In addition to the consent of
scholars, the genuineness and high antiquity of the objects in Dr.
Schliemann’s collection have been specially attested by so competent a
judge as Mr. Charles Newton, of the British Museum, who went to Athens
for the express purpose of examining them.[6] A letter by Mr. Frank
Calvert, who is so honourably mentioned in the work, deserves special
notice for the implied testimony which it bears to Dr. Schliemann’s good
faith, while strongly criticising some of his statements.[7]

Among the false issues raised in the discussion, one most to be avoided
is the making the value of Dr. Schliemann’s discoveries dependent on the
question of the site of Troy as determined by the _data_ furnished by
the Iliad. The position is common to Schliemann and his adverse critics,
that Homer never saw the city of whose fate he sang;--because, says
Schliemann, it had long been buried beneath its own ashes and the
cities, or the ruins of the cities, built above it;--because, say the
objectors, Homer created a Troy of his own imagination. The former
existence and site of Troy were known to Homer--says Schliemann--by the
unbroken tradition belonging to the spot where the Greek colonists
founded the city which they called by the same name as, and believed to
be the true successor of, the Homeric ILIUM. Of this, it is replied, we
know nothing, and we have no other guide to _Homer’s Troy_ save the data
of the Iliad. Be it so; and if those data really point to Hissarlik--as
was the universal opinion of antiquity, till a sceptical grammarian
invented another site, which all scholars now reject--as was also the
opinion of modern scholars, till the new site of Bunarbashi was invented
by Lechevalier to suit the Iliad, and accepted by many critics, but
rejected by others, including the high authority of Grote--then the
conclusion is irresistible, that Schliemann has found the Troy of which
Homer had heard through the lasting report of poetic fame: Ἡμεῖς δὲ
κλέος οἶον ἀκούομεν.[8] But the corresponding _negative_ does _not_
follow; for, if Homer’s Troy was but a city built in the ethereal region
of his fancy, his placing it at Bunarbashi, or on any other spot, could
not affect the lost site of the true Troy, _if such a city ever
existed_, and therefore can be no objection to the argument, that the
discovery of an ancient city on the traditional site of the heroic Troy
confirms the truth of the tradition on both points--the _real existence_
of the city, as well as its existence on this site. The paradox--that
Troy never existed and that Bunarbashi was its site--was so far
confirmed by Schliemann that he dug at Bunarbashi, and found clear
evidence that the idea of a great city having ever stood there is a mere
imagination. The few remains of walls, that were found there, confirm
instead of weakening the negative conclusion; for they are as utterly
inadequate to be the remains of the “great, sacred, wealthy Ilium,” as
they are suitable to the little town of Gergis, with which they are now
identified by an inscription. In short, that the real city of Troy could
not have stood at Bunarbashi, is one of the most certain results of
Schliemann’s researches.

The same sure test of downright digging has finally disposed of all the
other suggested sites, leaving by the “method of exhaustion” the
inevitable conclusion, that the only great city (or succession of
cities), that we know to have existed in the Troad before the historic
Grecian colony of Ilium, rose and perished--as the Greeks of Ilium
always said it did--on the ground beneath their feet, upon the Hill of
Hissarlik. And that Homer, or--if you please--the so-called Homeric
bards, familiar with the Troad, and avowedly following tradition, should
have imagined a different site, would be, at the least, very surprising.
This is not the place for an analysis of the Homeric local evidence;
but, coming fresh from a renewed perusal of the _Iliad_ with a view to
this very question, the Editor feels bound to express the conviction
that its indications, while in themselves consistent with the site of
Hissarlik, can be interpreted in no other way, now that we know what
that site contains.[9]

Standing, as it does, at the very point of junction between the East and
West, and in the region where we find the connecting link between the
primitive Greeks of Asia and Europe,[10] the Hill of Hissarlik answers
at once to the primitive type of a Greek city, and to the present
condition of the primeval capitals of the East. Like so many of the
first, in Greece, Asia Minor, and Italy, the old city was a hill-fort,
an Acropolis built near but not close upon the sea, in a situation
suited at once for defence against the neighbouring barbarians, and for
the prosecution of that commerce, whether by its own maritime
enterprise, or by intercourse with foreign voyagers, of which the
copper, ivory, and other objects from the ruins furnish decisive
proofs.[11] This type is as conspicuously wanting at Bunarbashi, as it
is well marked by the site of Hissarlik.

Like the other great oriental capitals of the Old World, the present
condition of Troy is that of a mound, such as those in the plain of the
Tigris and Euphrates, offering for ages the invitation to research,
which has only been accepted and rewarded in our own day. The
resemblance is so striking, as to raise a strong presumption that, as
the mounds of Nimrud and Kouyunjik, of Khorsabad and Hillah, have been
found to contain the palaces of the Assyrian and Babylonian kings, so we
may accept the ruins found in the mound of Hissarlik as those of the
capital of that primeval empire in Asia Minor, which is indicated by the
Homeric tradition, and proved to have been a reality by the Egyptian
monuments.[12]

This parallel seems to throw some light on a question, concerning which
Dr. Schliemann is forced to a result which disappointed himself, and
does not appear satisfactory to us--that of the magnitude of Troy. As
the mounds opened by Layard and his fellow labourers contained only the
“royal quarters,” which towered above the rude buildings of cities the
magnitude of which is attested by abundant proofs, so it is reasonable
to believe that the ruins at Hissarlik are those of the royal quarter,
the only really _permanent_ part of the city, built on the hill capping
the lower plateau which lifted the huts of the common people above the
marshes and inundations of the Scamander and the Simoïs. In both cases
the fragile dwellings of the multitude have perished; and the pottery
and other remains, which were left on the surface of the plateau of
Ilium, would naturally be cleared away by the succeeding settlers.
Instead, therefore, of supposing with Schliemann, that Homer’s poetical
exaggeration invented the “Pergamus,” we would rather say that he
exalted the mean dwellings that clustered about the Pergamus into the
“well-built city” with her “wide streets.”

We cannot sympathize with the sentimental objection that, in proportion
as the conviction grows that the Troy of Homer has been found, his
poetry is brought down from the heights of pure imagination. Epic
Poetry, the very essence of which is narrative, has always achieved its
noblest triumphs in celebrating events which were at least believed to
be real, not in the invention of incidents and deeds purely imaginary.
The most resolute deniers of any historic basis for the story of Troy
will admit that neither the scene nor the chief actors were invented by
Homer, or, if you please, the Homeric poets, who assuredly believed the
truth of the traditions to which the _Iliad_ gave an immortal form. Any
discovery which verifies that belief strengthens the foundation without
impairing the superstructure, and adds the interest of truthfulness to
those poetic beauties which remain the pure creation of Homer.

Leaving the Homeric bearings of the question to the discussion of which
no speedy end can be anticipated, all are agreed that Dr. Schliemann’s
discoveries have added immensely to that growing mass of evidence which
is tending to solve one of the most interesting problems in the history
of the world, the connection between the East and West, especially with
regard to the spread of Aryan civilization.[13] Two points are becoming
clearer every day, the early existence of members of the Greek race on
the shores of Asia, and the essential truth of those traditions about
the Oriental influence on Greek civilization, which, within our own
remembrance, have passed through the stages of uncritical acceptance,
hypercritical rejection, and discriminating belief founded on sure
evidence.

It would seem as if Troy, familiar to our childhood as the point of
contact in poetry between the East and West, were reappearing in the
science of archæology as a link between the eastern and western branches
of the antiquities of the great Aryan family, extending its influence to
our own island in another sense than the legend of Brute the Trojan. How
great an increase of light may soon be expected from the deciphering of
the Inscriptions found at Hissarlik may be inferred, in part, from the
brief account, in the Appendix, of the progress thus far made. In fine,
few dissentients will be found from the judgment of a not too favourable
critic, that “Dr. Schliemann, in spite of his over-great enthusiasm, ...
_has done the world an incalculable service_.”[14]

The decipherment of the inscriptions will probably go far to determine
the curious question of the use of the terra-cotta _whorls_, found in
such numbers in all the four pre-Hellenic strata of remains at
Hissarlik. That they had some practical purpose may be inferred both
from this very abundance, and from the occurrence of similar objects
among the remains of various early races. Besides the examples given by
Dr. Schliemann, they have been found in various parts of our own island,
and especially in Scotland, but always (we believe) without decorations.
On the other hand, the Aryan emblems and the inscriptions[15] marked
upon them would seem to show that they were applied to, if not
originally designed for, some higher use. It seems quite natural for a
simple and religious race, such as the early Aryans certainly were, to
stamp religious emblems and sentences on objects in daily use, and then
to consecrate them as _ex voto_ offerings, according to Dr. Schliemann’s
suggestion. The astronomical significance, which Schliemann finds in
many of the whorls, is unmistakeable in most of the terra-cotta balls;
and this seems to furnish evidence that the people who made them had
some acquaintance, at least, with the astronomical science of Babylonia.

The keen discussion provoked by Dr. Schliemann’s novel explanation of
the θεὰ γλαυκῶπις Ἀθήνη might be left “a pretty quarrel as it
stands,”[16] did there not appear to be a key of which neither party has
made sufficient use. The symbolism, which embodied divine attributes in
animal forms, belonged unquestionably to an early form of the Greek
religion, as well as to the Egyptian and Assyrian.[17] The ram-headed
Ammon, the hawk-headed Ra, the eagle-headed Nisroch, form exact
precedents for an owl-headed Athena, a personation which may very well
have passed into the slighter forms of owl-faced, owl-eyed, bright-eyed.
Indeed, we see no other explanation of the constant connection of the
owl with the goddess, which survived to the most perfect age of Greek
sculpture. The question is not to be decided by an etymological analysis
of the sense of γλαυκῶπις in the Greek writers, long after the old
symbolism had been forgotten, nor even by the sense which Homer may have
attached to the word in his own mind. One of the most striking
characters of his language is his use of _fixed epithets_; and he might
very well have inherited the title of the tutelar goddess of the Ionian
race with the rest of his stock of traditions. If γλαυκῶπις were merely
a common attributive, signifying “bright-eyed,” it is very remarkable
that Homer should never apply it to mortal women, or to any goddess save
Athena. We are expressing no opinion upon the accuracy of Schliemann’s
identification in every case; but the _rudeness_ of many of his
“owl-faced idols” is no stumbling-block, for the oldest and rudest
sacred images were held in lasting and peculiar reverence. The Ephesian
image of Artemis, “which fell down from Jove,” is a case parallel to
what the “Palladium” of Ilium may have been.

The ethnological interpretation of the four _strata_ of remains at
Hissarlik is another of the questions which it would be premature to
discuss; but a passing reference may be allowed to their very
remarkable correspondence with the traditions relating to the site.
First, Homer recognizes a city which preceded the Ilium of Priam, and
which had been destroyed by Hercules; and Schliemann found a primeval
city, of considerable civilization, on the native rock, below the ruins
which he regards as the Homeric Troy. Tradition speaks of a Phrygian
population, of which the Trojans were a branch, as having apparently
displaced, and driven over into Europe, the kindred Pelasgians. Above
the second stratum are the remains of a third city, which, in the type
and patterns of its terra-cottas, instruments, and ornaments, shows a
close resemblance to the second; and the link of connection is rivetted
by the inscriptions in the same character in both strata. And so, in the
Homeric poems, every reader is struck with the common bonds of genealogy
and language, traditions and mutual intercourse, religion and manners,
between the Greeks who assail Troy and the Trojans who defend it. If the
legend of the Trojan War preserves the tradition of a real conquest of
the city by a kindred race, the very nature of the case forbids us to
accept literally the story, that the conquerors simply sailed away
again.[18] It is far more reasonable to regard the _ten years_ of the
War, and the _ten years_ of the _Return of the Chiefs_ (Νόστοι) as
cycles of ethnic struggles, the details of which had been sublimed into
poetical traditions. The fact, that Schliemann traces in the third
stratum a civilization lower than in the second, is an objection only
from the point of view of our classical prepossessions. There are not
wanting indications in Homer (as Curtius, among others, has pointed
out) that the Trojans were more civilized and wealthy than the Greeks;
and in the much earlier age, to which the conflict--if real at all--must
have belonged, we may be sure that the Asiatic people had over their
European kindred an advantage which we may venture to symbolize by the
golden arms of Glaucus and the brazen arms of Diomed (Homer, _Iliad_,
VI. 235, 236). Xanthus, the old historian of Lydia, preserves the
tradition of a reflux migration of Phrygians from Europe into Asia,
after the Trojan War, and says that they conquered Troy and settled in
its territory. This migration is ascribed to the pressure of the
barbarian Thracians; and the fourth stratum, with its traces of merely
wooden buildings, and other marks of a lower stage of civilization,
corresponds to that conquest of the Troad by those same barbarian
Thracians, the tradition of which is preserved by Herodotus and other
writers. The primitive dwellings of those races in Thrace still furnish
the flint implements, which are most abundant in the fourth stratum at
Hissarlik.

The extremely interesting concurrence of instruments of stone with those
of copper (or bronze, see p. 361) in all the four strata at Hissarlik,
may be illustrated by a case which has fallen under our notice while
dismissing this sheet for press. A mound recently opened at the Bocenos,
near Carnac (in the Morbihan), has disclosed the remains of a Gallic
house, of the _second century_ of our era, in which _flint implements_
were found, intermixed with pottery of various styles, from the most
primitive to the finest examples of native Gallic art, and among all
these objects was a terra-cotta head of the _Venus Anadyomene_.[19] Such
facts as these furnish a caution against the too hasty application of
the theory of the Ages of Stone, Bronze, and Iron.

Another illustration is worth adding of the persistence of the forms of
objects in common use in the same region. (See p. 47.) Mr. Davis, in his
recently published travels in Asia Minor,[20] describes a wooden vessel
for carrying water, which he saw at Hierapolis, in Phrygia, of the very
same form as the crown-handled vase-covers of terra-cotta found in such
numbers by Schliemann (see pp. 25, 48, 86, 95, &c.). “They are made of a
section of the pine: the inside is hollowed from below, and the bottom
is closed by another piece of wood exactly fitted into it.” The two
drawings given by Mr. Davis closely resemble our cut, No. 51, p. 86.

Our last letter from Dr. Schliemann announced the approaching
termination of his lawsuit with the Turkish Government, arising out of
the dispute referred to in the ‘Introduction’ (p. 52). The collection
has been valued by two experts; and Dr. Schliemann satisfies the demand
of the Turkish Government by a payment in cash, and an engagement to
continue the excavations in Troy for three or four months for the
benefit of the Imperial Museum at Constantinople. We rejoice that he has
not “closed the excavations at Hissarlik for ever” (see p. 356), and
wait to see what new discoveries may equal or surpass those of the
“Scæan Gates,” the “Palace,” and the “Treasure of Priam.”

Meanwhile, as the use of so mythical a name as that of Troy’s last king
has furnished a special butt for critical scorn, it seems due to Dr.
Schliemann to quote his reason for retaining it:--[21]

“I identify with the Homeric Ilion the city second in succession from
the virgin soil, because only in that city were used the Great Tower,
the great Circuit Wall, the great Double Gate, and the ancient palace of
the chief or king, whom I call Priam, because he is called so by the
tradition of which Homer is the echo; but as soon as it is proved that
Homer and the tradition were wrong, and that Troy’s last king was called
‘Smith,’ I shall at once call him so.” Those who believe Troy to be a
myth and Priam a shadow as unsubstantial as the shape, whose head

    “The likeness of a kingly crown had on,”

need not grudge Schliemann the satisfaction of giving the unappropriated
_nominis umbra_ to the owner of his very substantial Treasure. The name
of Priam may possibly even yet be read on the inscriptions, as the names
of the Assyrian kings have been read on theirs, or it may be an
invention of the bard’s; but the name of TROY can no longer be withheld
from the “splendid ruins” of the great and wealthy city which stood upon
its traditional site--_a city which has been sacked by enemies and burnt
with fire_.

PHILIP SMITH.

HAMPSTEAD,
_Christmas Eve, 1874_.

[Illustration: Terra-cotta Tablets from the Greek Stratum (1-2 M.).]




TABLE OF CONTENTS.


EDITOR’S PREFACE                                           Page      iii

AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE OF DR. HENRY SCHLIEMANN              “         1

Diagram showing the successive Strata of Remains on the Hill
of Hissarlik                                                 “        10

INTRODUCTION                                                 “        11

Comparative Table of French Meters and English Measures      “        56


_WORK AT HISSARLIK IN 1871._

CHAPTER I.

_On the Hill of Hissarlik, October 18th, 1871._

     The site of ILIUM described--Excavations in 1870: the City Wall of
     Lysimachus--Purchase of the site and grant of a _firman_--Arrival
     of Dr. and Madame Schliemann in 1871, and beginning of the
     Excavations--The Hill of HISSARLIK, the _Acropolis_ of the Greek
     Ilium--Search for its limits--Difficulties of the work--The great
     cutting on the North side--Greek coins found--Dangers from fever 57


CHAPTER II.

_On the Hill of Hissarlik, October 26th, 1871._

     Number of workmen--Discoveries at 2 to 4 meters deep--Greek
     coins--Remarkable terra-cottas with small stamps, probably _Ex
     votos_--These cease, and are succeeded by the whorls--Bones of
     sharks, shells of mussels and oysters, and pottery--Three Greek
     Inscriptions--The splendid panoramic view from Hissarlik--The Plain
     of Troy and the heroic _tumuli_--Thymbria: Mr. Frank Calvert’s
     Museum--The mound of Chanaï Tépé--The Scamander and its ancient
     bed--Valley of the Simoïs, and Ruins of Ophrynium 64


CHAPTER III.

_On the Hill of Hissarlik, November 3rd, 1871._

     Puzzling transitions from the “Stone Age” to a higher
     civilization--The stone age reappears in force, mixed with pottery
     of fine workmanship, and the whorls in great number--Conjectures
     as to their uses: probably _Ex votos_--_Priapi_ of stone and
     terra-cotta: their worship brought by the primitive Aryans from
     Bactria--Vessels with the owl’s face--Boars’ tusks--Various
     implements and weapons of stone--Hand mill-stones--Models of canoes
     in terra-cotta--Whetstones--The one object of the excavations, to
     find TROY 75


CHAPTER IV.

_On the Hill of Hissarlik, November 18th, 1871._

     Another passage from the Stone Age to copper implements mixed with
     stone--The signs of a higher civilization increase with the depth
     reached--All the implements are of better workmanship--Discovery of
     supposed inscriptions--Further discussion of the use of the
     whorls--TROY still to be reached--Fine terra-cotta vessels of
     remarkable forms--Great numbers of stone weights and hand
     mill-stones--Numerous house-walls--Construction of the great
     cutting--Fever and quinine--Wounds and arnica 81


CHAPTER V.

_On the Hill of Hissarlik, November 24th, 1871._

     Interruptions from Rain--Last works of the season, 1871--The
     supposed ruins of Troy reached--Great blocks of stone--Engineering
     contrivances--Excavations at the “Village of the Ilians:” no traces
     of habitation, and none of hot springs--Results of the excavations
     thus far--Review of the objects found at various depths--Structure
     of the lowest houses yet reached--Difficulties of the
     excavations--The object aimed at--Growth of the Hill of Hissarlik
     90


_WORK AT HISSARLIK IN 1872._

CHAPTER VI.

_On the Hill of Hissarlik, April 5th, 1872._

     New assistants for 1872--Cost of the excavations--Digging of the
     great platform on the North--Venomous snakes--A supporting buttress
     on the North side of the hill--Objects discovered: little idols of
     fine marble--Whorls engraved with the _suastika_ [Illustration:
     block-style cross] and 卐--Significance of these emblems in the old
     Aryan religion--Their occurrence among other Aryan
     nations--Mentioned in old Indian literature--Illustrative quotation
     from Émile Burnouf 98


CHAPTER VII.

_On the Hill of Hissarlik, April 25th, 1872._

     Smoking at work forbidden, and a mutiny suppressed--Progress of the
     great platform--Traces of sacrifices--Colossal blocks of stone
     belonging to great buildings--Funereal and other huge
     urns--Supposed traces of Assyrian art--Ancient undisturbed
     remains--Further discoveries of stone implements and owl-faced
     idols--Meaning of the epithet “γλαυκῶπις”--Parallel of Ἥρα βοῶπις,
     and expected discovery of ox-headed idols at Mycenæ--Vases of
     remarkable forms--Dangers and engineering expedients--Georgios
     Photidas--Extent of the Pergamus of Troy--Poisonous snakes, and the
     snake-weed--The whorls with the central sun, stars, the _suastika_,
     the _Sôma_, or Tree of Life, and sacrificial altars--The name of
     Mount Ida, probably brought from Bactria 107


CHAPTER VIII.

_On the Hill of Hissarlik, May 11th, 1872._

     Hindrances through Greek festivals--Thickness of the layers of
     _débris_ above the native rock--Date of the foundation of
     Troy--Impossibility of the _Bunarbashi_ theory--Homeric epithets
     suitable to Hissarlik--Etymology of Ἴλιος, signifying probably the
     “fortress of the Sun"--The _Aruna_ of the Egyptian
     records--Progress of the platform, and corresponding excavation on
     the south--The bulwark of Lysimachus--Ruins of great
     buildings--Marks of civilization increasing with the depth--Vases,
     and fragments of great urns--A remarkable terra-cotta--A whorl with
     the appearance of an inscription 122


CHAPTER IX.

_On the Hill of Hissarlik, May 23rd, 1872._

     Superstition of the Greeks about saints’ days--Further engineering
     works--Narrow escape of six men--Ancient building on the western
     terrace--The ruins under this house--Old Trojan mode of
     building--Continued marks of higher civilization--Terra-cottas
     engraved with Aryan symbols: antelopes, a man in the attitude of
     prayer, flaming altars, hares--The symbol of the moon--Solar
     emblems, and rotating wheels--Remarks on former supposed
     inscriptions--Stone moulds for casting weapons and
     implements--Absence of cellars, and use of colossal jars in their
     stead--The quarry used for the Trojan buildings--“Un Médecin malgré
     lui."--Blood-letting priest-doctors--Efficacy of
     sea-baths--Ingratitude of the peasants cured--Increasing heat 131


CHAPTER X.

_On the Hill of Hissarlik, June 18th, 1872._

     A third platform dug--Traces of former excavations by the
     Turks--Block of triglyphs, with bas-relief of Apollo--Fall of an
     earth-wall--Plan of a trench through the whole hill--Admirable
     remains in the lowest stratum but one--The plain and engraved
     whorls--Objects of gold, silver, copper, and ivory--Remarkable
     terra-cottas--The pottery of the _lowest stratum_ quite distinct
     from that of the next above--Its resemblance to the Etruscan, in
     quality only--Curious funereal urns--Skeleton of a six months’
     embryo--Other remains in the lowest stratum--Idols of fine marble,
     the sole exception to the superior workmanship of this stratum--The
     houses and palaces of the lowest stratum, of large stones joined
     with earth--Disappearance of the first people with the destruction
     of their town.

     The _second settlers_, of a different civilization--Their buildings
     of unburnt brick on stone foundations--These bricks burnt by the
     great conflagration--Destruction of the walls of the former
     settlers--Live toads coëval with Troy!--Long duration of the
     second settlers--Their Aryan descent proved by Aryan
     symbols--Various forms of their pottery--Vases in the form of
     animals--The whorls of this stratum--Their interesting
     devices--Copper weapons and implements, and moulds for casting
     them--Terra-cotta seals--Bracelets and ear-rings, of silver, gold,
     and electrum--Pins, &c., of ivory and bone--Fragments of a
     lyre--Various objects.

     The _third stratum_: the remains of an Aryan race--Hardly a trace
     of metal--Structure of their houses--Their stone implements and
     terra-cottas coarser--Various forms of pottery--Remarkable
     _terra-cotta balls_ with astronomical and religious
     symbols--Whorls--Stone weapons--Whetstones--Hammers and instruments
     of diorite--A well belonging to this people--This third town
     destroyed with its people.

     The _fourth settlers_: comparatively savage, but still of Aryan
     race--Whorls with like emblems, but of a degenerate form--Their
     pottery inferior, but with some curious forms--Idols of
     Athena--Articles of copper--Few stones--Charred remains, indicating
     wooden buildings--Stone weights, handmills, and knives and saws of
     flint--With this people the pre-Hellenic ages end--The stone
     buildings and painted and plain terra-cottas of _Greek Ilium_--Date
     of the Greek colony--Signs that the old inhabitants were not
     extirpated--The whorls of very coarse clay and patterns--Well, and
     jars for water and wine--Proofs of the regular succession of
     nations on the hill--Reply to the arguments of M. Nikolaïdes for
     the site at Bunarbashi--The Simoïs, Thymbrius, and Scamander--The
     tomb of Ajax at In-Tépé--Remains in it--Temple of Ajax and town of
     Aianteum--Tomb of Achilles and town of Achilleum--Tombs of
     Patroclus and Antilochus--The Greek camp--The tomb of Batiea or
     Myrina--Further discussion of the site 143


CHAPTER XI.

_On the Hill of Hissarlik, July 13th, 1872._

     Increase of men and machinery and cost on the works: but slow
     progress--Continued hurricane on “the windy Ilium” (Ἴλιος
     ἠνεμόεσσα)--The great platform proves too high--New
     cutting--Excavation of the temple--Objects found--Greek statuettes
     in terra-cotta--Many whorls with 卐 and suns--Wheel-shaped whorls
     with simple patterns in the lowest strata--Terra-cotta balls with
     suns and stars--Use of the whorls as amulets or coins
     discussed--Little bowls, probably lamps--Other articles of
     pottery--Funnels--A terra-cotta bell--Various beautiful
     terra-cottas--Attempts at forgery by the workmen--Mode of naming
     the men--The springs in front of Ilium--Question of Homer’s hot and
     cold spring--Course of the Simoïs--The tomb of Batiea or Myrina
     identified with the Pacha Tépé--Theatre of Lysimachus--Heat and
     wind--Plague of insects and scorpions--Konstantinos Kolobos, a
     native genius without feet 184

CHAPTER XII.

_Pergamus of Troy, August 4th, 1872._

     Discovery of an ancient wall on the northern slope--Discovery of a
     Tower on the south side--Its position and construction--It is
     Homer’s _Great Tower of Ilium_--Manner of building with stones and
     earth--A Greek inscription--Remarkable medal of the age of
     Commodus--Whorls found just below the surface--Terra-cottas found
     at small depths--Various objects found at the various depths--A
     skeleton, with ornaments of gold, which have been exposed to a
     great heat--Paucity of human remains, as the Trojans burnt their
     dead--No trace of pillars--Naming of the site as “Ilium” and the
     “Pergamus of Troy” 200


CHAPTER XIII.

_Pergamus of Troy, August 14th, 1872._

     Intended cessation of the work--Further excavation of the
     Tower--Layers of red ashes and calcined stones--Objects found on
     the Tower--Weapons, implements, and ornaments of stone, copper, and
     silver--Bones--Pottery and vases of remarkable forms--Objects found
     on each side of the Tower--First rain for four months--Thanks for
     escape from the constant dangers--Results of the excavations--The
     site of Homer’s Troy identified with that of Greek Ilium--Error of
     the Bunarbashi theory--Area of the Greek city--Depth of the
     accumulated _débris_ unexampled in the world--Multitude of
     interesting objects brought to light--Care in making drawings of
     them all 212


CHAPTER XIV.

_Athens, September 28th, 1872._

     Return to Troy to take plans and photographs--Damage to retaining
     walls--The unfaithfulness of the watchman--Stones carried off for a
     neighbouring church and houses--Injury by rain--Works for security
     during the winter--Opening up of a retaining wall on the side of
     the hill, probably built to support the temple of Athena--Supposed
     _débris_ of that temple--Drain belonging to it--Doric style of the
     temple proved by the block of Triglyphs--Temple of Apollo also on
     the Pergamus 220


_WORK AT HISSARLIK IN 1873._


CHAPTER XV.

_Pergamus of Troy, February 22nd, 1873._

     Return to Hissarlik in 1873--Interruptions by holydays and
     weather--Strong cold north winds--Importance of good overseers--An
     artist taken to draw the objects found--Want of
     workmen--Excavations on the site of the Temple--Blocks of Greek
     sculptured marble--Great increase of the hill to the east--Further
     portions of the great Trojan wall--Traces of fire--A terra-cotta
     hippopotamus, a sign of intercourse with Egypt--Idols and owl-faced
     vases--Vases of very curious forms--Whorls--Sling-bullets of copper
     and stone--Piece of ornamented ivory belonging to a musical
     instrument--New cutting from S.E to N.W.--Walls close below the
     surface--Wall of Lysimachus--Monograms on the stones--An
     inscription in honour of Caius Cæsar--Patronage of Ilium by the
     Julii as the descendants of Æneas--Good wine of the Troad 224


CHAPTER XVI.

_Pergamus of Troy, March 1st, 1873._

     Increased number of workmen--Further uncovering of the great
     buttress--Traces of a supposed small temple--Objects found on its
     site--Terra-cotta serpents’ heads: great importance attached to the
     serpent--Stone implements: hammers of a peculiar form--Copper
     implements: a sickle--Progress of the works at the south-east
     corner--Remains of an aqueduct from the Thymbrius--Large jars, used
     for cellars--Ruins of the Greek temple of Athena--Two important
     inscriptions discussed--Relations of the Greek Syrian Kings
     Antiochus I. and III. to Ilium 233


CHAPTER XVII.

_Pergamus of Troy, March 15th, 1873._

     Spring weather in the Plain of Troy--The Greek temple of
     Athena--Numerous fragments of sculpture--Reservoir of the
     temple--Excavation of the Tower--Difficulties of the work--Further
     discoveries of walls--Stone implements at small depths--Important
     distinction between the plain and decorated whorls--Greek and Roman
     coins--Absence of iron--Copper nails: their peculiar forms:
     probably dress and hair pins: some with heads and beads of gold and
     electrum--Original height of the Tower--Discovery of a Greek
     house--Various types of whorls--Further remarks on the Greek
     bas-relief--It belonged to the temple of Apollo--Stones from the
     excavations used for building in the villages around--Fever 248


CHAPTER XVIII.

_Pergamus of Troy, March 22nd, 1873._

     Weather and progress of the work--The lion-headed handle of a
     sceptre--Lions formerly in the Troad--Various objects
     found--Pottery--Implements of stone and copper--Whorls--Balls
     curiously decorated--Fragments of musical instruments--Remains of
     house walls--The storks of the Troad 259


CHAPTER XIX.

_Pergamus of Troy, March 29th, 1873._

     Splendid vases found on the Tower--Other articles--Human skull,
     bones, and ashes, found in an urn--New types of whorls--Greek
     votive discs of diorite--Moulds of mica-schist--The smaller
     quantity of copper than of stone implements explained--Discussion
     of the objection, that stone implements are not mentioned by
     Homer--Reply to Mr. Calvert’s article--Flint knives found in the
     Acropolis of Athens--A narrow escape from fire 266


CHAPTER XX.

_Pergamus of Troy, April 5th, 1873._

     Discovery of a large house upon the Tower--Marks of a great
     conflagration--Primitive Altar: its very remarkable position--Ruins
     of the temple of Athena--A small cellar--Skeletons of warriors
     with copper helmets and a lance--Structure of the
     helmet-crests--Terra-cottas--A crucible with copper still in
     it--Other objects--Extreme fineness of the engravings on the
     whorls--Pottery--Stone implements--Copper pins and other objects
     276


CHAPTER XXI.

_Pergamus of Troy, April 16th, 1873._

     Discovery of a street in the Pergamus--Three curious stone walls of
     different periods--Successive fortifications of the hill--Remains
     of ancient houses under the temple of Athena, that have suffered a
     great conflagration--Older house-walls below these, and a wall of
     fortification--Store, with the nine colossal jars--The great
     Altar--Objects found east of the Tower--Pottery with Egyptian
     hieroglyphics--Greek and other terra-cottas, &c.--Remarkable
     owl-vase--Handle, with an ox-head--Various very curious objects--A
     statue of one Metrodorus by Pytheas of Argos, with an
     inscription--Another Greek inscription, in honour of C. Claudius
     Nero 287


CHAPTER XXII.

_Pergamus of Troy, May 10th, 1873._

     Interruptions through festivals--Opening of the tumulus of
     Batiea--Pottery like that of the Trojan stratum at Hissarlik, and
     nothing else--No trace of burial--Its age--Further discoveries of
     burnt Trojan houses--Proof of their successive ages--Their
     construction--Discovery of a double gateway, with the copper bolts
     of the gates--The “SCÆAN GATE” of Homer--Tests of the extent of
     ancient Troy--The place where Priam sat to view the Greek
     forces--Homer’s knowledge of the Heroic Troy only
     traditional--Description of the gates, the walls, and the “PALACE
     OF PRIAM"--Vases, &c., found in Priam’s house--Copper, ivory, and
     other implements--The δέπα ἀμφικύπελλα--Houses discovered on the
     north platform--Further excavations of the city walls--Statuettes
     and vessels of the Greek period--Top of the Tower of Ilium
     uncovered, and its height determined--A curious trench in it,
     probably for the archers--Further excavations at Bunarbashi: only a
     few fragments of Greek pottery--The site of Ilium uninhabited since
     the end of the fourth century--The place confused with Alexandria
     Troas--No Byzantine remains at Hissarlik--Freshness of the Greek
     sculptures 300


CHAPTER XXIII.

_Troy, June 17th, 1873._

     Further discoveries of fortifications--The _great discovery of the_
     TREASURE _on the city wall_--Expedient for its preservation--The
     articles of the Treasure described--The Shield--The Caldron--Bottle
     and Vases of Gold--The golden δέπας ἀμφικύπελλον--Modes of working
     the gold--A cup of electrum--Silver plates, probably the _talents_
     of Homer--Vessels of Silver--Copper lance-heads: their peculiar
     form--Copper battle-axes--Copper daggers--Metal articles fused
     together by the conflagration--A knife and a piece of a
     sword--Signs of the Treasure having been packed in a wooden
     chest--The key found--The Treasure probably left behind in an
     effort to escape--Other articles found near the Treasure--The
     thousands of gold jewels found in a silver vase--The two golden
     diadems--The ear-rings, bracelets, and finger-rings--The smaller
     jewels of gold--Analysis of the copper articles by M.
     Landerer--Discovery of another room in the palace containing an
     inscribed stone, and curious terra-cottas--Silver dishes--Greek
     terra-cotta figures--Great abundance of the owl-faced
     vases--Limited extent of Troy--Its walls traced--Poetic
     exaggerations of Homer--_The one great point of_ TROY’S _reality
     established_--It was as large as the primitive Athens and
     Mycenæ--The wealth and power of Troy--Great height of its
     houses--Probable population--Troy known to Homer only by
     tradition--Question of a temple in Homer’s time--Characteristics of
     the Trojan stratum of remains, and their difference from those of
     the lowest stratum--The former opinion on this point
     recalled--Layer of metallic _scoriæ_ through the whole hill--Error
     of Strabo about the utter destruction of Troy--Part of the real
     Troy unfortunately destroyed in the earlier excavations; but many
     Trojan houses brought to light since--The stones of Troy not used
     in building other cities--Trojan houses of sun-dried bricks, except
     the most important buildings, which are of stones and earth--Extent
     and results of the excavations--Advice to future explorers--Further
     excavations on the north side--Very curious terra-cotta
     vessels--Perforated vases--A terra-cotta with hieroglyphics--Heads
     of oxen and horses; their probable significance--Idols of the Ilian
     Athena--Greek and Roman medals--Greek inscriptions--Final close of
     the excavations; thanksgiving for freedom from serious
     accidents--Commendations of Nicolaus Saphyros Jannakis, and other
     assistants, and of the artist Polychronios Tempesis, and of the
     engineer Adolphe Laurent 321

NOTE A. The river _Dumbrek_ is not the Thymbrius, but the Simoïs     358

NOTE B. Table of terra-cotta weights found at Hissarlik              359

NOTE C. Analysis by M. Damour of some of the metallic objects
found                                                                361

APPENDIX ON THE INSCRIPTIONS FOUND AT HISSARLIK                      363

INDEX                                                                375

COMPARATIVE TABLE of the ILLUSTRATIONS in Dr. Schliemann’s
Atlas and the Translation                                            386

[Illustration: Two Inscribed Whorls (5 M. and 7 M.).]

[Illustration: Terra-cotta Tablets from the Greek Stratum (2 M.).]




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.


MAPS AND PLANS.

MAP OF THE PLAIN OF TROY                                      _End of Volume_

PLAN I. ILIUM, THE GRECIAN COLONY                                  “

PLAN II. RUINS OF TROY--General Plan of Researches
made by Dr. Schliemann in 1870, 1871, 1872, and
1873                                                               “

PLAN III. THE TOWER OF ILIUM AND THE SCÆAN GATE               _Page_ 306

PLAN IV. TROY AT THE EPOCH OF PRIAM, according to Dr.
Schliemann’s Excavations                                             347


PLATES AND CUTS.

PLATE I. VIEW OF THE HILL OF HISSARLIK, CONTAINING THE
RUINS OF TROY, FROM THE NORTH, AFTER DR. SCHLIEMANN’S
EXCAVATIONS IN 1870, 1871, 1872, 1873                       _Frontispiece_

     The excavation to the left is on the site of the Greek Temple of
     Apollo, where the splendid metopé of the Sun-God was found. Then
     follows the great platform and the great trench cut through the
     whole hill. Still further to the right is the cutting of April,
     1870, in continuing which, in June, 1873, the Treasure was
     discovered.

Three Tablets of Terra-cotta, from the Ruins of Greek Ilium
(1-2 M.)                                                              xv

Two Inscribed Whorls                                               xxxii

Three Tablets of Terra-cotta (2 M.)                               xxxiii

No. 1. Fragment of _painted_ Pottery, from the lowest stratum         15

No. 2. Small Trojan Axes of Diorite (8 M.)                            21

PLATE II. GENERAL VIEW OF THE TREASURE OF PRIAM      _To face_        22

No. 3. Inscribed Terra-cotta Vase from the Palace (8 M.)              23

No. 4. Inscribed Terra-cotta Seal (7 M.)                              24

No. 5. Piece of Red Slate, perhaps a Whetstone, with an Inscription
(7 M.)                                                                24

No. 6. Terra-cotta Vase Cover (8 M.)                                  25

No. 7. Ornamented Ivory Tube, probably a Trojan Flute (8 M.)          25

No. 8. Piece of Ivory, belonging to a Trojan Lyre with Four
Strings (about 8 M.)                                                  25

No. 9. Ornamented Piece of Ivory belonging to a Trojan Seven-stringed
Lyre (7 M.)                                                           27

PLATE III. BLOCK OF TRIGLYPHS, WITH METOPÉ OF THE SUN-GOD.
From the Temple of Apollo in the Ruins of Greek
Ilium      _To face_                                                  32

Nos. 10, 11, 12. Terra-cotta Covers of Vases, with the Owl’s
Face (2, 3, and 7 M.)                                                 34

No. 13. Terra-cotta Vase, marked with an Aryan symbol (6 M.)          35

Nos. 14-30. Rude Idols found in the various Strata (2 to 14 M.)       36

No. 31. Remarkable Trojan Terra-cotta Vase, representing the
Ilian Athena (9 M.)                                                   37

No. 32. The largest of the Terra-cotta Vases found in the Royal
Palace of Troy. Height 20 inches                                      48

No. 33. Inscribed Trojan Vase of Terra-cotta (8½ M.)               50

No. 34. Inscription on the Vase No. 33                                50

No. 35. Fragment of a second painted Vase, from the Trojan
Stratum. (From a new Drawing.)                                        55

No. 36. A large Trojan Amphora of Terra-cotta (8 M.)                  63

Nos. 37-39. Stamped Terra-cottas (1½-2 M.)                         65

No. 40. Stamped Terra-cotta (2 M.)                                    65

PLATE IV. VIEW OF THE NORTHERN PART OF THE PLAIN OF
TROY, FROM THE HILL OF HISSARLIK                           _To face_  70

     With the ancient bed of the _Scamander_, the _Tombs of Achilles_
     and _Patroclus_, _Cape Sigeum_, the villages of _Yeni-Shehr_ and
     _Kum-Kaleh_, the _Hellespont_ and _Ægean Sea_, the peninsula of
     _Gallipoli_ and the islands of _Imbrus_ and _Samothrace_. The
     _Tumulus of Æsyetes_ is in the central foreground, in front of the
     wretched little village of _Kum-koï_.

PLATE V. VIEW OF THE SOUTH-EASTERN PART OF THE PLAIN
OF TROY, FROM THE HILL OF HISSARLIK                         _To face_ 70

     The foreground shows the excavations in the eastern part of Troy,
     the foundations of the _Temple_, and the _Altar of Athena_; beyond
     is the village of _Chiplak_; in the distance the chain of Mount
     Ida, capped with snow, except in July and August.

No. 41. A great mixing Vessel (κρατήρ) of Terra-cotta (7 M.)            74

Nos. 42-44. Terra-cotta Whorls (7-14 M.)                              80

No. 45. Copper Implements and Weapons from the Trojan
stratum (8 M.)                                                        82

No. 46. A Mould of Mica-schist for casting Copper Implements
(8 M.)                                                                82

Nos. 47, 48, 49, 50. Stone Instruments from the Trojan stratum
(8 M.)                                                                83

Nos. 51, 52. Trojan Terra-cottas (8 M.)                               86

No. 53. Small Trojan Vase (9 M.)                                      87

Nos. 54, 55. Trojan Terra-cotta Vases (8 M.)                          87

Nos. 56-61. Stone Implements of the earliest Settlers                 94

No. 62. Small Trojan Vase of Terra-cotta, with Decorations            95

No. 63. A Trojan Vase-cover of red Terra-cotta (7 M.)                 95

No. 64. A stone Implement of unknown use (2 M.)                       97

No. 65. A strange Vessel of Terra-cotta (15 M.)                       97

Nos. 66, 67, 68. Trojan Sling-bullets of Loadstone (9 and 10 M.)     101

No. 69. The Foot-print of Buddha                                     103

No. 70. Large Terra-cotta Vase, with the Symbols of the Ilian
Goddess (4 M.)                                                       106

No. 71. A Mould of Mica-schist for casting Ornaments (14 M.)         110

No. 72. Fragment of a large Urn of Terra-cotta with Assyrian (?)
Decorations, from the Lowest Stratum (14 M.)                         110

No. 73. Trojan Plates found on the Tower (8 M.)                      114

No. 74. Vase Cover with a human face (8 M.)                          115

No. 75. A Whorl, with three animals (3 M.)                           121

No. 76. Fragment of a Vase of polished black Earthenware,
with Pattern inlaid in White (14 M.)                                 129

No. 77. Fragment of Terra-cotta, perhaps part of a box (16 M.)       129

No. 78. A Trojan Terra-cotta Seal (8 M.)                             130

No. 78ª. Terra-cottas with Aryan Emblems (4 M.; 3 M.; 5 M.)          130

No. 79. Fragment of a brilliant dark-grey Vessel (13 M.)             135

No. 80. Whorl with pattern of a moving Wheel (16 M.)                 137

No. 81. Whorl with Symbols of Lightning (7 M.)                       138

No. 82. Two fragments of a great Mould of Mica-schist for
casting Copper Weapons and Ornaments (14 M.)                         139

PLATE VI. TROJAN BUILDINGS ON THE NORTH SIDE, AND IN THE
GREAT TRENCH CUT THROUGH THE WHOLE HILL      _To face_               143

Nos. 83-91. Objects of Metal from the Lowest Stratum                 150

Nos. 92-101. Ivory Pins, Needles, &c. (11-15 M.)                     150

Nos. 102, 103. Hand Millstones of Lava (14-16 M.)                    151

No. 104. A splendid Vase with Suspension-rings (15 M.)               151

No. 105. Singular Double Vase (13-14 M.)                             152

No. 106. Black Vase of Terra-cotta (14 or 15 M.)                     152

No. 107. Funereal Urn of Stone, found on the Primary Rock,
with Human Ashes in it (15½ M.)                                   153

No. 108. _a_, Hand Millstone of Lava (15 M.). _b_, Brilliant black
Dish with side Rings for hanging it up (14 M.). _c_, _c_, _c_, _c_,
Small decorated Rings of Terra-cotta (10-14 M.)                      155

No. 109. Rude Terra-cotta Idol (14 M.)                               155

No. 110. Fragment of Pottery, with the _Suastika_ (14 M.)            157

Nos. 111, 112. Double-handled Vases of Terra-cotta, from the
Trojan Stratum (9 M.)                                                158

No. 113. A Trojan Vase in Terra-cotta of a very remarkable
form (8 M.)                                                          159

No. 114. Engraved Terra-cotta Vessel in the form of a Pig (or
Hedgehog?). 7 M.                                                     160

No. 115. Inscribed Whorl (7 M.)                                      161

No. 116. Terra-cotta Seal (1 M.)                                     162

No. 117. A Trojan Hand Millstone of Lava (10 M.)                     163

No. 118. A piece of Granite, perhaps used, by means of a wooden
Handle, as an upper Millstone (10 M.)                                163

No. 119. A massive Hammer of Diorite (10 M.)                         163

No. 120. Piece of Granite, probably used as a Pestle. From the
Lowest Stratum (11-16 M.)                                            163

No. 121. Idol of Athena (8 M.) _a._ Front; _b._ Back                 164

Nos. 122-124. Balls of fine red Agate (9 M.)                         165

No. 125. A curious Terra-cotta Cup (4 M.)                            166

No. 126. Terra-cotta Pitcher of a frequent form (6 M.)               166

No. 127. A small Terra-cotta Vase, with two Handles and three
feet (6 M.)                                                          167

No. 128. Terra-cotta Vase of a frequent form (6 M.)                  167

No. 129. Terra-cotta Vase of a form frequent at the depth of
3-5 M.                                                               169

No. 130. Terra-cotta Vessel (4 M.)                                   170

No. 131. A small Terra-cotta Vase with two Rings for suspension
(2 M.)                                                               170

Nos. 132, 133. Owl-faced Vase-covers (3 M.)                          171

Nos. 134, 135. Two-handled Cups from the upper Stratum (2 M.)        171

No. 136. Terra-cotta Vase (2 M.)                                     171

No. 137. Perforated Terra-cotta (2 M.)                               171

Nos. 138, 139. Deep Plates (_pateræ_) with Rings for suspension,
placed (_a_) vertically or (_b_) horizontally (1 and 2 M.)           172

Nos. 140, 141. Idols of the Ilian Athena (3 M.)                      172

No. 142. Mould in Mica-schist (2½ M.)                             173

PLATE VII. A.--MOUND OF IN-TÉPÉ, THE TRADITIONAL TOMB
OF AJAX                                                  _To face_   178

     Upon the mound, which stands about one-third of a mile from the
     Hellespont, are seen the remains of a little temple, which was
     restored by Hadrian. Beneath the ruins is seen a vaulted passage,
     built of bricks, nearly 4 feet in height and width.

B.--MOUND CALLED THE TOMB OF ACHILLES.

     Formerly on the sea-shore, from which it is now divided by a low
     strip of sand.

No. 143. Terra-cotta Ball, representing apparently the climates
of the globe (8 M.)                                                  188

No. 144. Small Terra-cotta Vessel from the Lowest Stratum, with
four perforated feet, and one foot in the middle (14 M.)             190

Nos. 145, 146. Two little Funnels of Terra-cotta, inscribed with
Cyprian Letters (3 M.)                                               191

No. 147. A Trojan Humming-top (7 M.)                                 192

No. 148. Terra-cotta Bell, or Clapper, or Rattle (5 M.)              192

No. 149. A Trojan decorated Vase of Terra-cotta (7 M.)               199

PLATE VIII. THE GREAT TOWER OF ILIUM, FROM THE S.E.
                                                 _To face_           200

No. 150. Terra-cotta Vase (7 M.)                                     208

No. 151. Terra-cotta Vase in the form of an Animal (10 M.)           208

No. 152. Terra-cotta Vessel in the shape of a Pig (14 M.)            209

No. 153. Skull of a Woman, found near some gold ornaments in
the Lowest Stratum (13 M.)                                           209

No. 154. Block of Limestone, with a socket, in which the pivot
of a door may have turned (12 M.)                                    211

No. 155. A Trojan Terra-cotta Vase, with an Ornament like
the Greek _Lambda_ (8 M.)                                            214

No. 156. Curious Terra-cotta Vessel in the shape of a Mole
(Tower: 7 or 8 M.)                                                   214

No. 157. A Trojan Dish with side Rings, and Plates turned by
the Potter (Tower: 7 M.)                                             215

No. 158. A curious Trojan Jug of Terra-cotta (8 M.)                  219

No. 159. Terra-cotta Image of a Hippopotamus (7 M.)                  228

No. 160. Remarkable Terra-cotta Vessel in the shape of a
Bugle, with three feet (3 M.)                                        229

No. 161. Terra-cotta Vessel with three feet, a handle, and two
ears (5 M.)                                                          229

No. 162. Terra-cotta Image of a Pig, curiously marked with
Stars (4 M.)                                                         232

No. 163. One of the largest marble Idols, found in the Trojan
Stratum (8 M.)                                                       234

No. 164. Terra-cotta Pot-lid, with symbolical marks (6 M.)           235

No. 165. A curious Terra-cotta Idol of the Ilian Athena (7 M.)       235

No. 166. Pretty Terra-cotta Jug, with the neck bent back (7 M.)      236

No. 167. Remarkable Trojan Idol of Black Stone (7 M.)                236

Nos. 168, 169. Heads of Horned Serpents (4 M.)                       237

No. 170. A Serpent’s Head, with horns on both sides, and very
large eyes (6 M.)                                                    237

No. 171. Head of an Asp in Terra-cotta (both sides) (4 M.)           238

No. 172. A Whorl, with rude Symbols of the Owl’s Face,
Suastika, and lightning (3 M.)                                       255

No. 173. Splendid Trojan Vase of Terra-cotta, representing the
tutelary Goddess of Ilium, θεὰ γλαυκῶπις Ἀθήνη. The cover
forms the helmet (8 M.)                                              258

PLATE IX. UPPER PART OF THE BUILDINGS DISCOVERED IN THE
DEPTHS OF THE TEMPLE OF ATHENA. In the background
are seen the Altar and the Reservoir                    _To face_    259

No. 174. A Lion-headed Sceptre-handle of the finest crystal;
found on the Tower (8 M.)                                            260

No. 175. A mould of Mica-schist, for casting various metal
Instruments (Tower: 8 M.)                                            261

No. 176. A curious Instrument of Copper (3 M.)                       261

No. 177. A perforated and grooved piece of Mica-schist, probably
for supporting a Spit. Found on the Tower (8 M.)                     261

No. 178. A large Terra-cotta Vase, with two large Handles and
two small Handles or Rings (5 M.)                                    262

No. 179. A remarkable Terra-cotta Ball (6 M.)                        264

No. 180. A finely engraved Ivory Tube, probably part of a Flute.
Found on the Tower (8 M.)                                            264

No. 181. Knob for a Stick, of fine marble (3 M.)                     265

No. 182. Bone handle of a Trojan Staff or Sceptre (7 M.)             265

No. 183. A brilliant Black Vase, with the Symbols of the Ilian
Athena, from the Tower (8 M.)                                        267

No. 184. Vase-cover with Handle in shape of a Coronet (8 M.)         268

No. 185. Vase-cover with a Human Face (Tower, 8 M.)                  268

No. 186. Flat piece of Gold, in the form of an Arrow-head:
from the Tower (8 M.)                                                268

No. 187. Prettily decorated Tube of Ivory (Tower, 8 M.)              268

No. 188. Great Altar for Sacrifices, found in the depths of the
Temple of Athena (1-25th of the real size)                           278

No. 189. Copper Lance of a Trojan Warrior, found beside his
Skeleton (7 M.)                                                      279

No. 190. Skull of a Trojan Warrior, belonging to one of the two
Skeletons found in the House on the Tower (7 M.)                     280

No. 191. The upper and lower pieces of a Trojan Helmet-crest
φάλος placed together (7 M.)                                          280

No. 192. Great Copper Ring, found near the Helmet-crest (7 M.)       281

No. 193. An elegant bright-red Vase of Terra-cotta, decorated
with branches and signs of lightning, with holes in the
handles and lips, for cords to hang it up by (Tower, 8 M.)           282

No. 194. Terra-cotta Vase. Found on the Tower (8 M.)                 282

No. 195. Profile of a Vase-cover, with the Owl’s Face and
Helmet of Athena, in brilliant red Terra-cotta. Found in
an urn on the Tower (8 M.)                                           283

No. 196. An Earthenware Crucible on four feet, _still containing
some Copper_. Found on the Tower (7 M.)                              283

No. 197. Flower Saucer: the flat bottom ornamented. Found
on the Tower (8 M.)                                                  284

No. 198. A piece of Terra-cotta, with two holes slightly sunk
in front like eyes, and a hole perforated from side to side
(8 M.)                                                               285

No. 199. A remarkable Terra-cotta Vessel on three long feet,
with a handle and two small ears (7 M.)                              285

No. 200. A beautiful bright-red Terra-cotta Box, decorated with
a + and four 卐, and a halo of solar rays (3 M.)                      286

Nos. 201, 202. Little Decorated Whorls, of a remarkable shape        286

PLATE X. THE TOWER OF ILIUM, SCÆAN GATE, AND PALACE OF
PRIAM. Looking North along the cutting through the whole
Hill                                             _To face_           287

PLATE XI. A.--THE EXCAVATIONS IN THE TEMPLE OF ATHENA.
From the East                                    _To face_           290

     In front is seen the great Reservoir of the Temple, then the
     sacrificial Altar. On the right, a stone block of the foundations
     of the Temple is seen projecting out of the wall of earth. In the
     background, underneath where the man stands, is the position of the
     double _Scæan Gate_, of which, however, nothing is here visible. In
     the left-hand corner is one of the colossal jars, not visible in
     the next Plate.

     B.--THE MAGAZINE, WITH ITS COLOSSAL JARS, in the depths of the
     Temple of Athena.

     Of the _nine_ Jars, _six_ are visible; a _seventh_ (to the right,
     out of view) is broken. The two largest are beyond the wall of the
     Magazine, and one of these is seen in the preceding Plate.

No. 203. Fragment of a Terra-cotta Vase, with Egyptian hieroglyphics,
from the bottom of the Greek Stratum (2 M.)                          291

No. 204. A Greek Lamp on a tall foot (2 M.)                          292

No. 205. Fragment of a two-horned Serpent (κεράστης), in Terra-cotta
(3 M.)                                                               292

No. 206. Terra-cotta Cylinder, 1¼ in. long, with Symbolical
Signs (5 M.)                                                         293

No. 207. Terra-cotta Vase with helmeted image of the Ilian
Athena (6 M.)                                                        294

No. 208. Fragment of a large Cup-handle in black Terra-cotta:
with the head of an Ox (6 M.)                                        294

No. 209. A finely decorated little Vase of Terra-cotta (6 M.)        294

No. 210. Terra-cotta Disc stamped with a Swan and an Antelope
(6 M.). Remarkable for the depth                                     295

No. 211. Terra-cotta Disc pierced with two holes, and stamped
with the Head of a Warrior (8 M.)                                    295

No. 212. A piece of Bone, curiously engraved (7 M.)                  295

No. 213. Fragment of a Trojan Idol of Terra-cotta (6 M.)             296

Nos. 214, 215. Terra-cotta Cups or Scoops (7 M.)                     296

No. 216. Vase-cover in Terra-cotta (8 M.)                            296

No. 217. Terra-cotta Handle of a Trojan Brush, with the holes
in which the bristles have been fixed (10 M.)                        297

No. 218. Copper Bolts, found exactly in the middle of the first
and of the second Scæan Gates                                        302

PLATE XII. THE DOUBLE SCÆAN GATE, PALACE OF PRIAM, AND
TOWER OF ILIUM, with the Paved Road leading from the
Gate to the Plain from the North West                  _To face_     303

     Behind the Scæan Gate is seen the Great _Tower of Ilium_, and to
     the left of it the ruins of the _Palace of Priam_, beneath a mass
     of later, but still pre-Hellenic, buildings. In the foreground, to
     the right, is a wall of rubbish, which remains standing; and at the
     foot of this, where the Greek stands, is the great enclosing Wall
     of Troy, running in a north-westerly direction from the Scæan Gate.
     The walls to the left belong to the royal palace, and over this
     part there are no buildings of the post-Trojan time.

No. 219. Wonderful Vase of Terra-cotta from the Palace of
Priam (8 M.)                                                         307

No. 220. Terra-cotta Vase from the House of Priam, with remarkable
Decorations (9 M.)                                                   308

No. 221. A Terra-cotta Vase, with two little Ears, and two large
perforated Handles, marked with strange characters (5½ M.)        309

No. 222. A splendidly-decorated Vase of Terra-cotta, with three
Feet and two Ears. From the Palace (7½ M.)                        310

No. 223. A Terra-cotta Vase, with two Ears and covered with
dots. From the Palace (7 M.)                                         310

No. 224. Fine decorated Vase of Terra-cotta, with two Handles
and two great upright Wings. From the Palace (7½ M.)              311

No. 225. Five Copper Dress Pins, molten together by the conflagration.
From the Palace (8 M.)                                               312

No. 226. Engraved Cylinder of blue Felspar (Palace, 9 M.)            312

No. 227. Terra-cotta, engraved with ten rude Owls’ Faces (8 M.)      312

No. 228. Terra-cotta Vase, with a curious Decoration. From
the upper and later House above the Scæan Gate (6 M.)                315

No. 229. Terra-cotta Vase, with four Handles and a Lid (6 M.)        315

No. 230. A great Jug, with Handle and two Ears (6 M.)                315

No. 231. A remarkable Terra-cotta Cup (4 M.)                         317

Nos. 232, 233. Curious Terra-cottas from the Trojan Stratum
(8 and 7 M.)                                                         320

PLATE XIII. THE SCÆAN GATE AND PAVED ROAD, THE TOWER
OF ILIUM, CITY WALLS, PALACE OF PRIAM, AND THE WALLS
OF A TOWER OF THE GREEK AGE. From the South East         _To face_   321

     Here we see again the road leading down to the Plain, paved with
     great slabs of stone. In front of the Gate and Road is seen part
     of the Great _Tower of Ilium_, and to the right hand, next to and
     behind the Gate, the ruins of the _Palace of Priam_, partly
     overladen with later but still pre-Hellenic walls, and partly
     standing free. Behind, the Scæan Gate appears again, going in a
     direction W.N.W., then the great City Wall, and upon it, at or
     about the spot marked _a_, the _Treasure_ was found. In the
     background, where the man stands, is seen a wall built of massive
     hewn stones, belonging to a Tower of the Greek age. Behind this
     Tower-wall appear the Plain of Troy, the Hellespont, the island of
     Imbros, and above this the mountains of Samothrace. At the right
     extremity of the picture, also, a part of the Plain of Troy is seen
     through the great cutting, over the ruins of the royal House.

PLATE XIV. THE TREASURE OF PRIAM                       _To face_     324

No. 234. A Copper Shield with a boss (ἀσπὶς ὀμφαλόεσσα).

No. 235. Great Copper Caldron (λέβης).

PLATE XV. THE TREASURE OF PRIAM                         _To face_    325

No. 236. Curious Plate of Copper (perhaps a Hasp of the
Chest), with Discs fixed on one end, and a Silver Vase
welded to the other by the conflagration.

No. 237. Bottle of pure Gold, weighing about 1 lb. Troy.

No. 238. Cup of pure Gold, panelled, weighing 7½ oz.
Troy.

PLATE XVI. THE TREASURE OF PRIAM. Remarkable two-handled
Cup of Pure Gold (δέπας ἀμφικύπελλον), weighing
about 1 lb. 6 oz. Troy                                  _To face_    326

No. 239. Outside View of the Two-handled Gold Cup.

No. 240. Inside View of the Two-handled Gold Cup.

No. 241. Bronze Cup used in China for Libations and Drinking         327

PLATE XVII. THE TREASURE OF PRIAM                       _To face_    328

No. 242. Six Blades of Silver (Homeric Talents?).

Nos. 243, 244. Two Silver Vases, with caps and rings for
suspending by cords.

No. 245. A Silver Dish (φιάλη), with a boss in the centre.

No. 246. A Silver Cup, 3-1/3 in. high and nearly 4 in. wide.

PLATE XVIII. THE TREASURE OF PRIAM                      _To face_    329

No. 247. A small Silver Cover.

No. 248. A small Cup of Electrum.

No. 249. Large Silver Jug, with handle, in which the small
Ornaments were found.

No. 250. Silver Vase with part of another Silver Vase
welded to it by the fire.

No. 251. Silver Vase with a quantity of copper fixed to its
bottom by the fire.

Nos. 252-256. Trojan Lance-Heads of Copper.--TR.                     330

No. 256. Copper Lance and Battle-Axe welded together by the
conflagration. The Pin-hole of the Lance is visible.--TR.            330

Nos. 257-60. Trojan Battle-Axes of Copper.--TR.                      330

No. 261. Trojan Battle-Axe.--TR.                                     331

Nos. 262-268. Nos. 262, 263, 264, 266. Trojan Two-edged
Copper Daggers, with hooked Stems that have been fastened
into Wooden Handles. No. 264 is doubled up by the
conflagration. No. 265, Weapons molten together. No.
267, a Copper Sword-Blade, with a sharp edge at the end.
No. 268, a Four-sided Copper Bar, ending in a sharp
edge.--TR.                                                           332

No. 269. Copper Key, supposed to have belonged to the
Treasure-chest--TR.                                                  333

Nos. 270, 271. Cups of Electrum and Silver. Found in the
Palace, near the Treasure, 270 inside 271                            334

Nos. 272-275. Pieces of Helmet-crests found in a Room of the
Palace                                                               334

PLATE XIX. THE TREASURE OF PRIAM                        _To face_    335

Nos. 276, 277. The two Golden Diadems (πλεκταὶ ἀναδέσμαι).

PLATE XX. THE TREASURE OF PRIAM. Jewels of Gold         _To face_    336

No. 278. Selection from the small Golden Jewels found
in the Silver Jug.

No. 279. Golden Fillet (ἄμπυξ), above 18 inches long.

No. 280. Four Golden Earrings, or Tassels (θύσανοι), each
3½ inches long.

No. 281. Six Golden Bracelets welded together by the
 conflagration.--[TR.]                                               337

No. 282. 4610 Small Jewels of Gold.--TR.                             339

No. 283. Terra-cotta Vessel in the shape of a Cask (8 M.)            341

No. 284. Large Silver Vase found in the House of Priam (8 M.)        342

No. 285. Splendid Terra-cotta Vase from the Palace of Priam          350

No. 286. Curious double-necked Jug (8 M.)                            351

No. 287. Terra-cotta Vessel consisting of three Goblets rising
out of a tube on three feet (4 M.)                                   351

No. 288. Terra-cotta Vessel in the form of a Pig (7 M.)              352

No. 289. A Terra-cotta stamped with Hieroglyphics (1½ M.)         352

No. 290. Fragment of a Terra-cotta Vessel, in the shape of a
Horse’s Head (4 M.)                                                  353

No. 291. An Inscribed Trojan Whorl (8 M.)                            363

Nos. 292, 293. Two Trojan Whorls from the same depth (7 M.)
with an identical inscription                                        367

No. 294. The above Inscription developed (7 M.)                      368

No. 295. Inscription on a Trojan Seal (7 M.)                         368

No. 296. Inscription on a Trojan Whetstone (7 M.)                    368

No. 297. Inscription on a Trojan Vase from the Palace (8 M.)         369

No. 298. Trojan Whorl, with an Inscription (10 M.)                   369

No. 299. The Inscription developed (10 M.)                           369

No. 300. Terra-cotta Ball, with an Inscription (4 M.)                372


PLATES XXI.-LII. LITHOGRAPHIC PLATES OF TERRA-COTTA WHORLS AND
BALLS.[22]

(_At End of the Volume._)

PLATE XXI. SECTIONS OF WHORLS.

Nos. 301-308. Sections of Plain Whorls (see p. 40) (2-10 M.).

No. 309. Piece of Terra-cotta, of unknown use (see p. 219) (10 M.).

Nos. 310-316. Sections of Decorated Whorls (see p. 60) (3-11 M.).

PLATE XXII. TYPICAL PATTERNS OF WHORLS.[23]

No. 317. A Cross, with 4 nail-marks (7 M.).

No. 318. Do. with the lines double and oblique (7 M.).

No. 319. Do. with three arms (7 M.).

No. 320. Cross with triple lines; rows of triple dots on arms (see p.
187) (8 M.).

No. 321. Six quadruple segments round the edge (called by Schliemann
Rising Suns, by Burnouf Stations of the Sun), alternately with 6
Arrow-heads ↑ (see p. 133) (6 M.).

No. 322. Cross, with curved arms; nail-marked (7 M.).

No. 323D.[24] Geometric star-like patterns on both sides (5 M.).

No. 324. A Wheel with 13 spokes (sun-rays?), the spaces filled with dots
arranged in circles (7 M.).

No. 325. Two zigzag borders round the central Sun (9 M.).

No. 326. For description, see pp. 84, 137 (8½ M.).

No. 327. Five Suns round the central Sun (see p. 136) (7 M.).

No. 328. Five triple “Rising Suns” (comp. No. 321) round a large central
Sun (N.B. The _depth_ 14 M.).

No. 329. Wheel with spokes on both sides: very small (5 M.).

No. 330. The _Rosa Mystica_ (_Qu._, or an Inscription?) (4 M.).

No. 331D. Geometrical Patterns; Signs of Lightning (?) on one side (8
M.).

No. 332. Four strange characters (_Qu._, an Inscription?) (9 M.).

PLATE XXIII. TYPICAL PATTERNS OF WHORLS.

No. 333. A Wheel in motion (9 M.).

No. 334. An Inscription (9 M.).

No. 335. A Flower with 10 petals (3 M.).

No. 336. Five Signs, curiously like Roman numerals (8 M.).

No. 337D. A double moving Wheel, see p. 38 (6 M.).

No. 338D. _Obv._ Three “flaming Altars” (Schl.) and a group of Stars.
_Rev._, 3 flaming Altars and a 卐 (see p. 162) (6 M.).

No. 339. The _Rosa Mystica_ (see p. 160) (8 M.).

Nos. 340-341. Wheels in rapid rotation (see p. 38) (9 and 10 M.).

No. 342. A series of Strokes (7 M.).

No. 343. Various marks. The dots are perhaps for stars (10 M.).

No. 344. Geometric Pattern, like a Gothic quatrefoil (7 M.).

No. 345. Concentric Circles, and 4 wave-like sets of Lines (3½ M.).

No. 346. Three curious Signs (_Qu._, letters?) (7 M.).

No. 347. A cable-like Wreath (6 M.).

No. 348. Four concentric Circles and 6 quadruple “Rising Suns” (8 M.).

PLATE XXIV. WHORLS WITH SUASTIKAS, &C.

No. 349. One of the thin round Terra-cottas, with 2 holes, found chiefly
in the Greek Stratum (see p. 65). The 卐 on this example[25] forms a link
with the Whorls of the lower strata. Of impure yellow earth (2 M.).

No. 350. Three curved 卐. Grey earth (4 M.).

No. 351. Four 卐 in a zigzag Border. “The 4 sacrifices of the month or of
the year."--B. Fine yellow earth; polished; good work.[26]

No. 352. Three curved 卐. Grey; polished; good work (4 M.).

No. 353. An Inscription. Dull brown; polished; very coarse (9 M.).

No. 354. Three Rising Suns, and a Sign like a letter (?). Brown;
polished; the lines white (5 M.).

No. 355. Three 卐. “The 3 sacrifices."--B. (M.).

PLATE XXV. WHORLS WITH 卐 AND INSCRIPTIONS.

No. 356. Four 卐 of peculiar form. “The 4 sacrifices of the month or of
the year."--B. Dark grey; polished; beautiful work (7 M.).

No. 357. Apparently an Inscription. Blackish earth; burnt; badly
kneaded.

No. 358. Two 卐 and 2 Crosses. Grey; very rude material and work (7 M.).

No. 359. Six 卐. Black; polished; lines white.

No. 360. An Inscription (4 M.).

PLATE XXVI. ASTRONOMICAL SIGNS AND 卐.

No. 361. Three triple “Rising Suns,” a 卐, and 2 round Spots, viz. “The
sun and full moon, or the day of the full moon."--B. Fine brown earth
(3½ M.).

No. 362. “The 6 bi-monthly sacrifices."--B. (comp. p. 187). Fine yellow
earth (7 M.).

No. 363. “The morning and evening sacrifices: the 3 stations of the
Sun."--B. Yellowish; very coarse (5 M.).

No. 364. “The 4 epochs (quarters) of the month or of the year, and the
holy sacrifice."--B. Grey; polished; coarsely kneaded. Worn a little on
the rim.

PLATE XXVII. ARYAN EMBLEMS AND AN INSCRIPTION.

No. 365. Three triple “Rising Suns” and a 卐. Fine black earth; polished;
beautiful work (6 M.).

No. 366. Similar design. Greyish yellow (6 M.).

No. 367. Four Hares, representing the 4 weeks of the month, or the 4
quarters of the year (see p. 136). Fine black earth (6 M.).

No. 368. Four curved Crosses round the rim. “The 4 sacrifices of the
month or year."--B. Black; polished; good work; lines white (3½ M.).

No. 369. An Inscription from the Trojan Stratum. Dark grey; very coarse
(10 M.). (See Appendix, p. 369.)

No. 370. Divided into 2 fields by a line through the centre. In the left
is a 卐 with 2 spots ("the sun and full moon."--B.) and dots
(stars?--“the 7 at the top being the Great Bear."--B.). In the right M.
Burnouf finds 28 strokes for the days of the month. Black; polished;
lines white. N.B. Much worn by rubbing, especially on the under side (10
M.).

No. 371. “At top, 4 Crosses for the 4 weeks, with a 卐, or sacrifice, set
on fire by a flash of lightning; below, the 4 great Sacrifices."--B.
Greyish yellow; polished (4 M.).

PLATE XXVIII. RELIGIOUS AND ASTRONOMICAL EMBLEMS.

No. 372. Three 卐 (2 of a curious form), and 3 “flaming Altars” (SCHL.).
Grey; polished; lines white (6 M.).

No. 373. “The 3 stations of the Sun, or 3 mountains, with the 4
sacrifices of the year or the month round the circle of the Sun."--B.
Yellow; polished; rudely kneaded; the lines scratched in with a fine
point.

No. 374. “Divided into 2 fields by 2 points. _Left_: the mountain of the
E., the Sun, and 卐. _Right_: the mountains of the N. and W. and the full
moon. The ring is the circle of the year."--B. Grey; polished. Worn all
round by circular friction (7 M.).

No. 375. Various Symbols. Blackish yellow; very coarse. Worn all round
and on the under side.

No. 376. The Sôma Tree, or Tree of Life, a 卐, with Strokes indicating
numbers 2, 4, and 8. Yellow.

No. 377. Four Hares (the 4 quarters of the moon) round a Ring (the
circle of the year). Iron grey; polished (see p. 136) (10 M.).

No. 378D. _Obv._, an Inscription (?). _Rev._, a sort of Wheel. Part of
the edge worn down to a straight line (9 M.).

PLATE XXIX. ANIMALS AND OTHER SYMBOLS.

No. 379D. _Obv._, three Crosses (one with 4 nail-marks [Illustration:
cross with four dots]). _Rev._ (see the developed pattern): “_a._ 3
Antelopes with dots (stars); _b._ The Great Bear; _c._ Lightning, or
Water; _d._ Five 卐"--(B.) Grey; polished (see p. 136) (4 M.).

No. 380. “Two Antelopes, the halves of the month (_quinzaines_), round
the circle of the year."--B. Black; polished (see p. 135) (6 M.).

PLATE XXX. ANIMALS AND THE PRAYING MAN.

No. 381. A Hare and 2 Antelopes (_i. e._ the moon and the 2 winds
prevailing in the 2 half-months) round the circle of the year. Grey. (7
M.).

No. 382. The same subject (see p. 120). Grey; polished (3 M.). (_Observe
the different depths_).

No. 383. Three Animals, with _a Man in the attitude of Prayer_; “the
holy sacrifice of the full moon” (B.); but see Schliemann’s explanation
pp. 135, 137 (7 M.).

No. 384. The same subject as Nos. 381 and 382. Black; polish lost. _Part
of the edge worn flat_ (7 M.).

PLATE XXXI. ANIMALS AND OTHER SYMBOLS.

No. 385. Same subject as Nos. 381, 382, 384, but still ruder. Grey;
polished; very coarse (8 M.).

No. 386. Same subject. Yellow; polished; rude work (7 M.).

No. 387. Scroll Pattern round large, deep-sunk centre. Dark grey;
polished (10 M.).

No. 388. Six ÷ alternately with six [Illustration: symbol], having,
perhaps, some numerical meaning. The lines and dots filled in with white
on a polished black ground (8 M.).

No. 389. Four wave lines [Illustration: symbol] around the centre. Grey;
polished; worn (3 M.).

No. 390. Similar Pattern round the edge of a Whorl remarkable for its
small size. Black; polished; lines white. The space between the hole and
the inner ring is filled with yellow ochre.

PLATE XXXII. GEOMETRICAL AND OTHER PATTERNS.

No. 391. Rings of dots, which M. Burnouf attempts to explain as relating
to the Astronomical Calendar. Black; rude work (9 M.).

No. 392. Eleven Radii divide the field into spaces filled with cuneiform
characters (where the question of true _writing_ is still to be
investigated). Black; polished; rude work (10 M.).

No. 393. Six triple Rising Suns, with dots (5, 6, or 7) in the middle
space. Yellow; polished; pattern white (9 M.).

No. 394. Three 卐 (one with 2 dots), and a Sign (like a letter or
letters?). Yellow; polished; pattern white.

No. 395. An ornamental Quatrefoil. Brown; polished; pattern white, good
work (4½ M.).

No. 396D. A Geometrical Pattern, composed of triple segments, slightly
varied on two sides. Yellow; polished; patterns white (8 M.).

PLATE XXXIII. THE SÔMA TREE AND OTHER SYMBOLS.

No. 397. A sort of 5-armed Star, or 5 triple “mountains (B.),”
alternately with 5 triple Signs of Lightning. The ring of beads round
the centre is remarkable. Black; pattern white; fine work. Worn all over
by rubbing.

No. 398. Three triple Rising Suns and a Sôma Tree (see p. 119). Black;
polished. The hole is conical (9 M.).

No. 399. Five Sôma Trees and a triple Rising Sun.

No. 400. Three Sôma Trees and 2 other Signs. Dark brown; polished. Has
been used (5 M.).

No. 401. Four Sôma Trees forming a Cross (see p. 119). Black; polished;
pattern white. Slightly worn.

No. 402D. _Obv._ Eight irregular Rising Suns (double or quadruple).[27]
_Rev._ Twelve Sôma Trees radiating from the centre (see p. 187). Greyish
yellow; highly polished; rude work. The tip of the back worn by rubbing
(10 M.).

PLATE XXXIV. SÔMA TREES, FLAMING ALTARS, ETC.

No. 403. A Sôma Tree and 4 Rising Suns (3 triple and 1 double). Grey;
polished. Worn all over (see p. 187) (5 M.).

No. 404. Six Sôma Trees, pointing alternately to and from the centre
(see p. 269). Black; polished; lines white; rude (7 M.).

No. 405. Five 卐 and an Altar with 3 flames (?). Hole conical. Yellowish;
polished. Worn on under side (5½ M.).

No. 406. Four Rising Suns and a flaming Altar. Grey; polished. Worn on
under side (5 M.).

No. 407. Four Rising Suns and 2 Altars. Hole conical. Small size. Black;
polished; lines white. Worn on under side (8 M.).

No. 408. Three Rising Suns and an Altar. Small size. Very black earth,
like trachyte; lines white. Worn (5 M.).

No. 409. Similar Pattern on a larger Whorl. Grey. Hole conical.

PLATE XXXV. FLAMING ALTARS AND SÔMA TREES.

No. 410. Four Sôma Trees, forming a Cross (see p. 119). Ashy grey;
unpolished; coarse (9 M.).

No. 411. Three Altars and 3 irregular 卐. Brownish grey; polished;
pattern yellow (6 M.).

No. 412. Four Altars (?) arranged in a Cross, with dots (stars?). Dark
grey; very coarse.

No. 413. Six flaming Altars. Black; polished; lines white; good work (7
M.).

No. 414. Four Altars forming a Cross (see p. 121). Yellow; polished (8
M.).

No. 415. Five Altars. Small size. Black; pattern white; work good.

PLATE XXXVI. VARIOUS PATTERNS.

No. 416. Three flaming Altars. Grey; pattern white; good (8 M.).

No. 417. A double Circle, with 5 broad arms; on each a Sign of
Lightning. Brownish yellow; slightly polished; well made. Hole conical
(4 M.).

No. 418. Five Signs (_Qu._, letters?). Brown.

No. 419. A five-armed irregular Cross, with 2 卐 and 2 Signs of
Lightning. Yellowish; coarsely kneaded (7 M.).

No. 420. Two triple Rising Suns and a double zigzag (lightning) round
more than half the circumference. A beautiful black; polished; lines
white. A little worn on under side.

No. 421D. _Obv._ Irregular cross with zigzags (Signs of Lightning) on
arms. _Rev._ A curious Geometric Pattern (7 M.).

PLATE XXXVII. GEOMETRIC AND OTHER PATTERNS.

No. 422D. A triangular Pattern on both sides (8 M.).

No. 423. A six-armed cross with Signs of Lightning on the arms. Fine
yellow earth; polished; white pattern (9 M.).

No. 424. Four triple Rising Suns (one broken off) and a flaming Altar.
Black; polished; coarse (8 M.).

No. 425. Four Segmental Curves, with dots (see Plate). Much worn.
Brownish yellow (10 M.).

No. 426. Irregular marks, [Illustration: cross with four dots], zigzags,
&c. Brown; polished; work bad.

PLATE XXXVIII. VARIOUS PATTERNS.

No. 427. (See the Plate.) Yellow; polished; pattern white (8 M.).

No. 428. A double Rising Sun and 3 Owls’ Faces (?). Yellow; pattern
white (2 M.).

No. 429. Very irregular Star with numerous dots. Red earth; coarse; very
bad work.

No. 430. Two Spots between 2 large double Arcs. Yellow; polished (8 M.).

No. 431. (See the Plate.) Brownish yellow; pattern white (5 M.).

No. 432. Zigzag Pattern round edge (see the Plate). Brown; very good.

PLATE XXXIX. INSCRIPTION, AND OTHER PATTERNS.

No. 433. Fine six-pointed Star. Yellow; polished; pattern white.

No. 434. Three curious Figures round margin. (See the Plate.) Greyish
yellow; fair work (7 M.).

No. 435. An Inscription. Brown; very coarse (5 M.).

No. 436. Three double Rising Suns and an Altar (?). Coarse.

No. 437. Three |‘s alternately with 3 =V='s. Much worn all round[28] (5
M.).

No. 438. Looks like an Inscription. Brown. Worn at the ends.

PLATE XL. VARIOUS PATTERNS.

No. 439. Four triple Rising Suns and an Altar (?) (5 M.).

No. 440. A fine double Polygonal Star, with dots in the space between.
Brown; pattern white (10 M.).

No. 441. Three triple Rising Suns and an Arrow-head [Illustration:
double-V]. Light brown; polished (7 M.).

No. 442. Signs like Figures round a broad, deep centre.

No. 443. Two double Rising Suns and 5 large Spots (_Qu._, the 5
planets?) Dark brown; fine; polished.

No. 444. A plain Whorl, modelled into a sort of seven-pointed Star.
Brownish black (8 M.).

No. 445D. A very curious Pattern on both sides (see the Plate). Black;
polished; good work.

PLATE XLI. VARIOUS IRREGULAR PATTERNS.

No. 446. Sun with rays, Altar, 卐 through a sun or moon (?), &c. M.
Burnouf explains the 3 dots [Illustration: two lines with three dots] as
denoting “royal majesty.”

No. 447. Curious composition of 卐, long lines, and short lines.
Yellowish earth; badly modelled (9 M.).

No. 448D. Curious Pattern on both sides (see Plate). Brown; polished (9
M.).

No. 449D. _Obv._ Eleven straight Rays, with rows of dots between, and 1
zigzag Ray. _Rev._ 2 Rising Suns and a 卐. Grey; not polished. N.B. “The
edge cut all round by the friction of thread, like the kerbstone of a
well by the cord"--(B.) (8 M.).

No. 450D. _Obv._ 3 double Rising Suns and 2 curious signs -|-. _Rev._ 3
concentric Circles, with short Rays between the first and second. Grey;
polished; good work.

PLATE XLII. VARIOUS REMARKABLE PATTERNS.

No. 451D. _Obv._ Pentagonal Star, with Spots ☉, and dots, and raised
rim with dots round the hole. _Rev._ Sun, with 5 hooked rays (?) and 3
Spots ☉. Yellow earth; badly kneaded; not polished.

No. 452. A pair of |‘s and a pair of [Illustration: double up-side down
V] round a deep broad centre. Reddish earth, very badly kneaded;
polished.

No. 453. Two small Segmental Curves, filled with dots, and 2 Signs like
ladders. Brown; polished (6 M.).

No. 454. Two quadruple Rising Suns, a + with curved arms, several dots,
and a curious cruciform Sign. Fine brown earth (4 M.).

PLATE XLIII. VARIOUS PATTERNS.

No. 455D. Four Triangles on each side. Fine black earth; polished (6
M.).

No. 456. Six groups of Stars (?). A dirty yellowish brown; rudely
kneaded. Wheel-shaped, with lines on the broad flat edge.

No. 457. Dots and strange Characters (_Qu._, letters?). Blackish earth;
burnt; pattern white (?).

No. 458. Four Arrow-heads ↑ alternately with 4 Spots ☉ Brown-black;
  polished (7 M.).

No. 459. Wheel-shaped, with Pattern on the broad flat edge (see Plate).
Reddish earth.

No. 460. Three double Rising Suns and a Sign of 3 Strokes (_Qu._, a
letter?). Black; polished; pattern white (5 M.).

PLATE XLIV. VARIOUS PATTERNS.

No. 461. Covered with strange Characters (_Qu._, letters?). Coarse brown
earth; very badly modelled.

No. 462. Strange Characters looking like letters. Reddish earth;
polished; very coarse.

No. 463. Strange rude Marks. Black; very coarse.

No. 464D. _Obv._ Four Quatrefoils. _Rev._ (see Plate). Red earth; burnt
on one side. Much worn at both ends (9 M.).

No. 465D. _Obv._ Two very rude Quadrupeds.[29] _Rev._ Three Signs
(_Qu._, letters?). Coarse grey earth; very bad work. Worn (3½ M.).

PLATE XLV. VARIOUS PATTERNS.

No. 466. Six irregular V-shaped Signs. Bright brown (8 M.).

No. 467. Three Characters (_Qu._, letters?) and 5 Spots ☉. Yellowish;
polished; rude (5 M.).

No. 468. Five rude Birds, perhaps the Falcon of the Aryan mythology (see
pp. 120, 135). Reddish yellow; burnt.

No. 469. Three strange Characters (_Qu._, letters?) with Spots (stars?).
Brown; polished; badly kneaded. Hole badly made.

No. 470. Cross of a curious form. Rose-coloured earth; good. Looks
_new_, though from the _lowest Stratum_ (12 M.).

No. 471. Four triple Rising Suns, and a + with a Spot ☉. Black; pattern
white; good (7 M.).

PLATE XLVI. VARIOUS REMARKABLE PATTERNS.

No. 472. An Inscription. Greyish; polished; letters white; coarse (6
M.).

No. 473. Two Circles of Strokes and Dots. Reddish yellow; very coarse (4
M.).

No. 474. Five strange Characters. Brown-black; polish gone. Irregularly
worn all round (4 M.).

No. 475. (See the Plate.) Black; polished; bad work (8 M.).

No. 476. Four double Rising Suns and a Sign (_Qu._, letter?). Black;
polished; pattern white (7 M.).

PLATE XLVII. GEOMETRIC AND OTHER PATTERNS.

No. 477D. _Obv._ A six-pointed Star, with circle in middle and triple
edges (or 6 such figures as Burnouf calls _mountains_ in other
cases).[30] _Rev._ A Circle with 8 rays, alternately double and triple.
Black.

No. 478. The _Rosa Mystica_, as a cinquefoil, with rows of triple dots
along each petal (see p. 160). Dark grey; polished; good. N.B.
Completely worn by circular friction (7 M.).

No. 479. Six Spots round the centre, enclosed by a Circle with crooked
rays (_Qu._, the moon and 5 planets within the revolving sphere of
heaven?). Grey; coarse.

No. 480. Four quadruple Zigzags (Signs of Lightning), arranged as a
Cross (see p. 160). Very beautiful black; polished; pattern very white;
angles very sharp; very hard. One of the finest Trojan Whorls (10 M.).

No. 481D. Five parallel Circles of quadruple lines on the edge and both
faces, probably meant for a wheel in rapid motion (comp. Plate XXIII.
No. 340). “The exactly parallel circular lines were marked on the moist
clay with a _comb_, as is proved by the way in which their extremities
cross at the point of junction."--B.

PLATE XLVIII. VARIOUS PATTERNS.

No. 482. Three 卐 (Sacrifices) and 2 obscure Signs.--B. (Comp. Plate
XXII. No. 326, and Schliemann’s description, pp. 84 and 137.) Reddish;
very rude; kneaded. The _axes_ of the Whorl and the hole do not coincide
(8½ M.).

No. 483. A 卐 and rude Figures (_Qu._, animals or letters?). Grey;
polished; very coarse (4 M.).

No. 484. A Terra-cotta Tripod. The top (in the upper figure) shews the
Tree of Life (in the middle) attacked by the Caterpillar (on the right),
the symbol of the Powers of Mischief. On the left is a 卐 and other
Marks. Grey; polished; work rude (3 M.).

No. 485. Three concentric rows of Dots: 12 in the inner, 14 in the next,
and 17 in the outer border, which is marked by a Circle and divided by
straight lines. M. Burnouf explains the inner ring of dots as the 12
months of the year, and the 2 outer as referring to the days and
lunations (8 M.).

PLATE XLIX. A BALL AND WHORLS.

No. 486. A Celestial Sphere, with lines marking the Zones and the
Ecliptic. (The Ecliptic is not continued across the S. hemisphere, but
ends at the extremities of a hole pierced through the middle of the
Ball, possibly signifying the ancient belief that the nocturnal course
of the Sun was subterranean.) Black; unpolished (8 M.).

No. 487. Three quintuple Rising Suns, with a Sun crossed by a 卐. Grey;
polished; very regular (7 M.).

No. 488. Three Arcs, enclosing dots, and 2 卐. “The 3 stations of the
Sun. The Morning and Evening Sacrifices, with their priests: the Noon
has 3 priests."--B. Grey. Worn by circular friction.

No. 489. Four triple Arcs (Rising Suns) and a 卐. “The 4 quarters of the
month or of the year, with the Holy Sacrifice."--B. Fine black earth (10
M.).

No. 490D. _Obv._ Three Suns and 3 卐 alternately. “The 3 stations of the
Sun and the 3 Sacrifices.” _Rev._ Three triple Radii. Fine black earth;
polished (4 M.).

PLATE L. REMARKABLE BALL AND WHORL.

No. 491. Six faces of a Terra-cotta Ball, with Celestial Emblems, fully
described at p. 168. “One of the most interesting objects in the whole
collection” (SCHL.) Yellowish earth (5 M.).

No. 492. A Whorl, so nearly globular as to form a transition to the
Balls. Triple lines and rows of dots round the border; curious
characters (_Qu._, letters?) round the whole. Reddish yellow; badly
kneaded; not polished.

PLATE LI. A BALL AND INSCRIBED WHORLS.

No. 493. A Ball, with its 8 segments developed, fully described at pp.
167-8. Black earth; polished; patterns white (5 M.).

No. 494. Whorl with an Inscription. Blackish earth; badly kneaded. (M.
Burnouf pronounces this and No. 496 to be by the same workman as the
Whorl with the developed pattern (Plate XXV. No. 357) and the two
Inscribed Vases, No. 3, p. 23, and No. 33, P. 50) (7 M.).

No. 495D. A small Whorl, with cruciform Pattern on both sides (see
Plate). Light brown (M.).

No. 496. Very important Inscribed Whorl. The Inscription is the same as
that shown in No. 115, p. 161. (See Appendix, pp. 366-368.) Red coarse
earth; not polished; work very coarse (7 M.).

PLATE LII. TWO REMARKABLE TROJAN BALLS.

No. 497. Ball with an Inscription; showing 3 Faces and the Pattern
developed. Brownish grey; polished; pattern white (8 M.).

No. 498. Ball, with its 8 segments developed, representing the starry
heavens, with a 卐 and the Tree of Life. Yellow earth; badly modelled (8
M.). (Dr. Schliemann has 25 Terra-cotta Balls, most of them covered with
dots, and representing stars, with or without lines denoting the
equator, the colures, the zones, and the ecliptic.)

[Illustration: Piece of a Terra-cotta Dish, with the Owl’s Face. (14
M.)]




AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE

OF

DR. HENRY SCHLIEMANN.

FROM THE PREFACE TO HIS

‘ITHACA, THE PELOPONNESUS, AND TROY.’




AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE.


When, in the year 1832, at Kalkhorst, a village in Mecklenburg-Schwerin,
at the age of ten, I presented my father, as a Christmas gift, with a
badly written Latin essay upon the principal events of the Trojan war
and the adventures of Ulysses and Agamemnon, little did I think that,
six-and-thirty years later, I should offer the public a work on the same
subject, after having had the good fortune to see with my own eyes the
scene of that war, and the country of the heroes whose names have been
immortalized by Homer.

As soon as I had learnt to speak, my father related to me the great
deeds of the Homeric heroes. I loved these stories; they enchanted me
and transported me with the highest enthusiasm. The first impressions
which a child receives abide with him during his whole life; and, though
it was my lot, at the age of fourteen, to be apprenticed in the
warehouse of E. Ludwig Holtz in the small town of Fürstenberg, in
Mecklenburg, instead of following the scientific career for which I felt
an extraordinary predisposition, I always retained the same love for the
famous men of antiquity which I had conceived for them in my first
childhood.

In the small shop where I was employed for five years and a half, first
by Mr. Holtz and then by his successor, the excellent Mr. Th. Huckstädt,
my occupation consisted in retailing herrings, butter, brandy, milk and
salt, grinding potatoes for the still, sweeping the shop, and so forth.
I only came into contact with the lower classes of society.

From five in the morning to eleven at night I was engaged in this work,
and had not a moment free for study. Moreover I rapidly forgot the
little that I had learnt in my childhood, but I did not lose the love of
learning; indeed I never lost it, and, as long as I live, I shall never
forget the evening when a drunken miller came into the shop. He was the
son of a Protestant clergyman in a village near Teterow, and had almost
concluded his studies at the Gymnasium when he was expelled on account
of his bad conduct. To punish him for this, his father made him learn
the trade of a miller. Dissatisfied with his lot, the young man gave
himself up to drink, which however had not made him forget his Homer;
for he recited to us about one hundred lines of the poet, observing the
rhythmic cadence. Although I did not understand a word, the melodious
speech made a deep impression upon me, and I wept bitter tears for my
unhappy fate. Thrice I got him to repeat to me those god-like verses,
paying him with three glasses of brandy, which I bought with the few
pence that made up my whole fortune. From that moment I never ceased to
pray God that by His grace I might yet have the happiness to learn
Greek.

There seemed, however, no hope of my escaping from the sad and low
position in which I found myself. And yet I was released from it as if
by a miracle. In lifting a cask too heavy for me, I hurt my chest; I
spat blood and was no longer able to work. In despair I went to Hamburg,
where I succeeded in obtaining a situation as cabin-boy on board of a
ship bound for La Guayra in Venezuela.[31]

On the 28th of November, 1841, we left Hamburg, but on the 12th of
December we were shipwrecked in a fearful storm off the island of Texel.
After innumerable dangers, the crew were saved. I regarded it as my
destiny to remain in Holland, and resolved to go to Amsterdam and enlist
as a soldier. But this could not be done as quickly as I had imagined,
and the few florins, which I had collected as alms on the island of
Texel and in Enkhuyzen, were soon spent in Amsterdam. As my means of
living were entirely exhausted, I feigned illness and was taken into the
hospital. From this terrible situation I was released by the kind
ship-broker J. F. Wendt of Hamburg, who heard of my misfortune and sent
me the proceeds of a small subscription which had been raised for me. He
at the same time recommended me to the excellent Consul-General of the
North German Confederation in Amsterdam, Mr. W. Hepner, who procured me
a situation in the office of Mr. F. C. Quien.

In my new situation my work consisted in stamping bills of exchange and
getting them cashed in the town, and in carrying letters to and from the
post-office. This mechanical occupation suited me, for it left me time
to think of my neglected education.

First of all I took pains to learn to write legibly, and then, in order
to improve my position, I went on to the study of the modern languages.
My annual salary amounted only to 800 francs (32_l._), half of which I
spent upon my studies; on the other half I lived, miserably enough to be
sure. My lodging, which cost 8 francs a month, was a wretched garret
without a fire, where I shivered with cold in winter and was scorched
with the heat in summer; my breakfast consisted of rye-meal porridge,
and my dinner never cost more than a penny farthing. But nothing spurs
one on more to study than misery and the certain prospect of being able
to release oneself from it by unremitting work. I applied myself with
extraordinary diligence to the study of English. Necessity showed me a
method which greatly facilitates the study of a language. This method
consists in reading a great deal aloud, without making a translation;
devoting one hour every day to writing essays upon subjects that
interest one, correcting these under a teacher’s supervision, learning
them by heart, and repeating in the next lesson what was corrected on
the previous day. My memory was bad, since from my childhood it had not
been exercised upon any object; but I made use of every moment, and even
stole time for study. I never went on my errands, even in the rain,
without having my book in my hand and learning something by heart; and I
never waited at the post-office without reading. By such means I
gradually strengthened my memory, and in half a year I had succeeded in
acquiring a thorough knowledge of the English language. I then applied
the same method to the study of French, the difficulties of which I
overcame likewise in another six months. These persevering and excessive
studies had in the course of one year strengthened my memory to such a
degree that the study of Dutch, Spanish, Italian, and Portuguese
appeared very easy, and it did not take me more than six weeks to write
each of these languages and to speak them fluently. But my passion for
study caused me to neglect my mechanical occupation in the office,
especially when I began to consider it beneath me. My principals would
give me no promotion; they probably thought that a person who shows his
incapacity for the business of a servant in an office is therefore quite
worthless for any higher duties.

At last, through the intercession of my worthy friends, L. Stoll of
Mannheim and Ballauff of Bremen, I had the good fortune to obtain a
situation as correspondent and bookkeeper in the office of Messrs. B. H.
Schröder and Co. in Amsterdam, who engaged me at a salary of 1200 francs
(48_l._); but when they saw my zeal, they paid me 2000 francs as an
encouragement. This generosity, for which I shall ever be grateful to
them, was in fact the foundation of my prosperity; for, as I thought
that I could make myself still more useful by a knowledge of Russian, I
set to work to learn that language also. But the only Russian books that
I could procure were an old grammar, a lexicon, and a bad translation of
Telemachus. In spite of all my inquiries I could not find a teacher of
Russian, for no one in Amsterdam understood a word of the language: so I
betook myself to study without a master, and, with the help of the
grammar, I learnt the Russian letters and their pronunciation in a few
days. Then, following my old method, I began to write short stories of
my own composition and to learn them off by heart. As I had no one to
correct my work, it was, no doubt, very bad indeed, but I tried at the
same time to correct my faults by the practical exercise of learning
Telemachus by heart. It occurred to me that I should make more progress
if I had some one to whom I could relate the adventures of Telemachus;
so I hired a poor Jew for 4 francs a week, who had to come every evening
for two hours to listen to my Russian recitations, of which he did not
understand a syllable.

As the ceilings of the rooms in Holland consist of single boards, people
on the ground-floor can hear what is said in the third storey. My
recitations therefore, delivered in a loud voice, annoyed the other
tenants, who complained to the landlord, and twice during my study of
the Russian language I was forced to change my lodgings. But these
inconveniences did not diminish my zeal, and in the course of six weeks
I wrote my first Russian letter to a Russian in London, and I was able
to converse fluently in this language with the Russian merchants who had
come to Amsterdam for the indigo auctions.

After I had concluded my study of the Russian language, I began to
occupy myself seriously with the literatures of the languages which I
had learnt.

In the beginning of the year 1846, my worthy principals sent me as their
agent to St. Petersburg, where a year later I established a mercantile
house on my own account; but, during the first eight or nine years that
I spent in Russia, I was so overwhelmed with work that I could not
continue my linguistic studies, and it was not till the year 1854 that I
found it possible to acquire the Swedish and Polish languages.

Great as was my wish to learn Greek, I did not venture upon its study
till I had acquired a moderate fortune; for I was afraid that this
language would exercise too great a fascination upon me and estrange me
from my commercial business. When, however, I could no longer restrain
my desire for learning, I at last set vigorously to work at Greek in
January 1856; first with Mr. N. Pappadakes, and then with Mr. Th. Vimpos
of Athens, always following my old method. It did not take me more than
six weeks to master the difficulties of modern Greek, and I then applied
myself to the ancient language, of which in three months I learned
sufficient to understand some of the ancient authors, and especially
Homer, whom I read and re-read with the most lively enthusiasm.

I then occupied myself for two years exclusively with the ancient Greek
literature; and during this time I read almost all the old authors
cursorily, and the Iliad and Odyssey several times.

In the year 1858 I travelled to Sweden, Denmark, Germany, Italy and
Egypt, where I sailed up the Nile as far as the second cataract in
Nubia. I availed myself of this opportunity to learn Arabic, and I
afterwards travelled across the desert from Cairo to Jerusalem. I
visited Petra, traversed the whole of Syria, and in this manner I had
abundant opportunity of acquiring a practical knowledge of Arabic, the
deeper study of which I afterwards continued in St. Petersburg. After
leaving Syria, I visited Athens in the summer of 1859, and I was on the
point of starting for the island of Ithaca when I was seized with an
illness which obliged me to return to St. Petersburg.

Heaven had blessed my mercantile undertakings in a wonderful manner, so
that at the end of 1863 I found myself in possession of a fortune such
as my ambition had never ventured to aspire to. I therefore retired from
business, in order to devote myself exclusively to the studies which
have the greatest fascination for me.

In the year 1864 I was on the road to visit the native island of Ulysses
and the Plain of Troy, when I allowed myself to be persuaded to visit
India, China and Japan, and to travel round the world. I spent two years
on this journey, and on my return in 1866 I settled in Paris, with the
purpose of devoting the rest of my life to study, and especially to
archæology, which has the greatest charm for me.

At last I was able to realize the dream of my whole life, and to visit
at my leisure the scene of those events which had such an intense
interest for me, and the country of the heroes whose adventures had
delighted and comforted my childhood. I started, therefore, last summer,
and visited in succession the places which still possess such living
poetic memorials of antiquity.

I had not, however, the ambition of publishing a work on the subject;
this I only decided upon doing when I found what errors almost all
archæologists had spread about the site once occupied by the Homeric
capital of Ithaca, about the stables of Eumæus, the Island of Asteris,
ancient Troy, the sepulchral mounds of Batiea and of Æsyetes, the tomb
of Hector, and so forth.

Apart from the hope of correcting opinions which I hold to be erroneous,
I should consider myself fortunate could I aid in diffusing among the
intelligent public a taste for the beautiful and noble studies which
have sustained my courage during the hard trials of my life, and which
will sweeten the days yet left me to live.

HENRY SCHLIEMANN.

_6, Place St.-Michel, Paris,
Dec. 31st, 1868._




INTRODUCTION.


DIAGRAM

SHEWING THE SUCCESSIVE _STRATA_ OF REMAINS ON THE HILL OF HISSARLIK.

  _Meters._    _Feet (abt.)_        _Surface._
         +----+----------------------------------------------------+
   2     |////|          Remains of Greek Ilium.                   |
       2 +----+ 6½-------------------------------------------------+
   2     |\\\\|          4th Stratum.                              |
       4 +----+ 13 ------------------------------------------------+
   3     |////|          3rd Stratum.                              |
         |////|                                                    |
       7 +----+ 23 ------------------------------------------------+
   3     |\\\\|          2nd Stratum. The Troy of Homer, according |
         |\\\\|          to Schliemann.                            |
      10 +----+ 33 ------------------------------------------------+
   4     |////|                                                    |
  to     |////|          1st Stratum.                              |
   6     |////|                                                    |
      14 |////| 46 ................................................|
      to |////| to                                                 |
      16 +----+ 52½ -----------------------------------------------+
         |    |          Native rock.




INTRODUCTION.

CONTENTS.

     Form of the Work--Changing and progressive opinions due to the
     Novelty of the Discoveries--Chronology--Duration of the GREEK
     ILIUM--Four successive strata of remains beneath its ruins on the
     hill of _Hissarlik_--Remains of the _Earliest Settlers_, who were
     of the Aryan race--Symbols on their terra-cottas--The _Second
     Settlers_, the Trojans of Homer--The Tower of Ilium, Scæan Gate,
     and City Walls, covered with the ashes of a
     conflagration--Skeletons denoting a bloody war--The Royal
     Treasure--Small extent of Troy: not beyond the hill of
     Hissarlik--Poetical exaggerations of Homer, who only knew it by
     tradition--The city was wealthy and powerful, though small--Stone
     weapons and implements, _not_ denoting the “Stone
     Age"--Contemporaneous use of copper, silver, and gold, for tools,
     weapons, vases, and ornaments--Inscriptions proving the use of a
     written language--Splendid remains of pottery--Symbols proving that
     the Trojans were an Aryan race--Their buildings of stone and
     wood--Antiquity of the City--The _Third Settlers_, also of the
     Aryan race--Their pottery coarser--Musical instruments--Their mode
     of building--Fewer implements of copper, but those of stone
     abundant--The _Fourth Settlers_, of the Aryan race, built the
     _Wooden Ilium_--Their progressive decline in civilization--Some
     copper implements, with tools and weapons of stone--The _Greek
     Ilium_ built about B.C. 700: ceased to exist in the fourth century
     after Christ--Evidence of Coins--No Byzantine remains--The Walls of
     Lysimachus--Metals found in the various strata: copper and bronze,
     silver, gold, lead: no iron or tin--Sculptures of the Greek
     age--Metopé of the Sun-God--Images of the owl-faced Athena common
     to all the pre-Hellenic strata: their various forms--The perforated
     whorls of terra-cotta, with Aryan symbols--The sign of the
     _Suastika_ 卐--The plain whorls--Discussion of the site of
     Troy--Traditionally placed on that of the Greek Ilium--View of
     Demetrius and Strabo refuted--Opinion of Lechevalier for
     Bunarbashi, generally accepted, but erroneous--No remains of a
     great city there--The site really that of Gergis--Fragments of
     Hellenic pottery only--The three so-called tombs of heroes also
     Greek--Proposed sites at Chiplak and Akshi-Koï refuted by the
     absence of remains--Modern authorities in favour of
     Hissarlik--Ancient types of pottery still made in the Troad--Covers
     with owl-faces, and vases with uplifted wings--Colouring materials
     of the pottery--The inscriptions--The author’s relations with the
     Turkish Government--Professor Max Müller on the owl-headed
     goddess--Some probable traces of another settlement between the
     fourth pre-Hellenic people and the Greek colonists.


The present book is a sort of Diary of my excavations at Troy, for all
the memoirs of which it consists were, as the vividness of the
descriptions will prove, written down by me on the spot while proceeding
with my works.[32]

If my memoirs now and then contain contradictions, I hope that these may
be pardoned when it is considered that I have here revealed a new world
for archæology, that the objects which I have brought to light by
thousands are of a kind hitherto never or but very rarely found, and
that consequently everything appeared strange and mysterious to me.
Hence I frequently ventured upon conjectures which I was obliged to give
up on mature consideration, till I at last acquired a thorough insight,
and could draw well-founded conclusions from many actual proofs.

One of my greatest difficulties has been to make the enormous
accumulation of _débris_ at Troy agree with chronology; and in this--in
spite of long-searching and pondering--I have only partially succeeded.
According to Herodotus (VII. 43): “Xerxes in his march through the
Troad, before invading Greece (B.C. 480) arrived at the Scamander and
went up to Priam’s Pergamus, as he wished to see that citadel; and,
after having seen it, and inquired into its past fortunes, he sacrificed
1000 oxen to the Ilian Athena, and the Magi poured libations to the
manes of the heroes.”

This passage tacitly implies that at that time a Greek colony had long
since held possession of the town, and, according to Strabo’s testimony
(XIII. i. 42), such a colony built Ilium during the dominion of the
Lydians. Now, as the commencement of the Lydian dominion dates from the
year 797 B.C., and as the Ilians seem to have been completely
established there long before the arrival of Xerxes in 480 B.C., we may
fairly assume that their first settlement in Troy took place about 700
B.C. The house-walls of Hellenic architecture, consisting of large
stones without cement, as well as the remains of Greek household
utensils, do not, however, extend in any case to a depth of more than
two meters (6½ feet) in the excavations on the flat surface of the
hill.

As I find in Ilium no inscriptions later than those belonging to the
second century after Christ, and no coins of a later date than Constans
II. and Constantine II., but very many belonging to these two emperors,
as well as to Constantine the Great, it may be regarded as certain that
the town began to decay even before the time of Constantine the Great,
who, as is well known, at first intended to build Constantinople on that
site; but that it remained an inhabited place till about the end of the
reign of Constans II., that is till about A.D. 361. But the accumulation
of _débris_ during this long period of 1061 years amounts only to two
meters or 6½ feet, whereas we have still to dig to a depth of 12
meters or 40 feet, and in many places even to 14 meters or 46½ feet,
below this, before reaching the native ground which consists of shelly
limestone (_Muschelkalk_). This immense layer of _débris_ from 40 to
46½ feet thick, which has been left by the four different nations
that successively inhabited the hill _before_ the arrival of the Greek
colony, that is before 700 B.C., is an immensely rich _cornucopia_ of
the most remarkable terra-cottas, such as have never been seen before,
and of other objects which have not the most distant resemblance to the
productions of Hellenic art. The question now forces itself upon
us:--Whether this enormous mass of ruins may not have been brought from
another place to increase the height of the hill? Such an hypothesis, as
every visitor to my excavations may convince himself at the first
glance, is perfectly impossible; because in all the strata of _débris_,
from the native rock, at a depth of from 14 to 16 meters (46 to 52½
feet) up to 4 meters (13 feet) below the surface, we continually see
remains of masonry, which rest upon strong foundations, and are the
ruins of real houses; and, moreover, because all the numerous large
wine, water, and funereal urns that are met with are found in an upright
position. The next question is:--But how many centuries have been
required to form a layer of _débris_, 40 and even 46½ feet thick,
from the ruins of pre-Hellenic houses, if the formation of the uppermost
one, the Greek layer of 6½ feet thick, required 1061 years? During my
three years’ excavations in the depths of Troy, I have had daily and
hourly opportunities of convincing myself that, from the standard of our
own or of the ancient Greek mode of life, we can form no idea of the
life and doings of the four nations which successively inhabited this
hill before the time of the Greek settlement. They must have had a
terrible time of it, otherwise we should not find the walls of one house
upon the ruined remains of another, in continuous but _irregular_
succession; and it is just because we can form no idea of the way in
which these nations lived and what calamities they had to endure, that
it is impossible to calculate the duration of their existence, even
approximately, from the thickness of their ruins. It is extremely
remarkable, but perfectly intelligible from the continual calamities
which befel the town, that the civilization of all the four nations
constantly declined; the terra-cottas, which show continuous
_décadence_, leave no doubt of this.

The first settlement on this hill of _Hissarlik_ seems, however, to
have been of the longest duration, for its ruins cover the rock to a
height of from 4 to 6 meters (13 to 20 feet). Its houses and walls of
fortification were built of stones, large and small, joined with earth,
and manifold remains of these may be seen in my excavations. I thought
last year that these settlers were identical with the Trojans of whom
Homer sings, because I imagined that I had found among their ruins
fragments of the double cup, the Homeric “δέπας ἀμφικύπελλον.” From
closer examination, however, it has become evident that these fragments
were the remains of simple cups with a hollow stem, which can never have
been used as a second cup. Moreover, I believe that in my memoirs of
this year (1873) I have sufficiently proved that Aristotle (_Hist.
Anim._, IX. 40) is wrong in assigning to the Homeric “δέπας
ἀμφικύπελλον” the form of a bee’s cell, whence this cup has ever since
been erroneously interpreted as a double cup, and that it can mean
nothing but a cup with a handle on either side. Cups of such a form are
_never_ met with in the _débris_ of the first settlement of this hill;
but they frequently occur, and in great quantities, among those of the
succeeding people, and also among those of the two later nations which
preceded the Greek colony on the spot. The large golden cup with two
handles, weighing 600 grammes (a pound and a half), which I found in the
royal treasure at the depth of 28 feet in the _débris_ of the second
people, leaves no doubt of this fact.[33]

[Illustration: No. 1

Fragment of _painted_ pottery from the lowest stratum (16 M.).]

The terra-cottas which I found on the native rock, at a depth of 14
meters (46 feet), are all of a more excellent quality than any met with
in the upper strata. They are of a brilliant black, red, or brown
colour, ornamented with patterns cut and filled with a white substance;
the flat cups have horizontal rings on two sides, the vases have
generally two perpendicular rings on each side for hanging them up with
cords. Of painted terra-cottas I found only one fragment.[34]

All that can be said of the first settlers is that they belonged to the
Aryan race, as is sufficiently proved by the Aryan religious symbols met
with in the strata of their ruins (among which we find the _Suastika_
卐), both upon the pieces of pottery and upon the small curious
terra-cottas with a hole in the centre, which have the form of the
crater of a volcano or of a _carrousel_ (_i.e._ a top).[35]

The excavations made this year (1873) have sufficiently proved that the
second nation which built a town on this hill, upon the _débris_ of the
first settlers (which is from 13 to 20 feet deep), are the Trojans of
whom Homer sings. Their _débris_ lies from 7 to 10 meters, or 23 to 33
feet, below the surface. This Trojan stratum, which, without exception,
bears marks of great heat, consists mainly of red ashes of wood, which
rise from 5 to 10 feet above the Great Tower of Ilium, the double Scæan
Gate, and the great enclosing Wall, the construction of which Homer
ascribes to Poseidon and Apollo; and they show that the town was
destroyed by a fearful conflagration. How great the heat must have been
is clear also from the large slabs of stone upon the road leading from
the double Scæan Gate down to the Plain: for when I laid this road open
a few months ago, all the slabs appeared as uninjured as if they had
been put down quite recently; but after they had been exposed to the air
for a few days, the slabs of the upper part of the road, to the extent
of some 10 feet, which had been exposed to the heat, began to crumble
away, and they have now almost disappeared, while those of the lower
portion of the road, which had not been touched by the fire, have
remained uninjured, and seem to be indestructible. A further proof of
the terrible catastrophe is furnished by a stratum of scoriæ of melted
lead and copper, from 1/5 to 1-1/5 of an inch thick, which extends
nearly through the whole hill at a depth of from 28 to 29½ feet. That
Troy was destroyed by enemies after a bloody war is further attested by
the many human bones which I found in these heaps of _débris_, and above
all by the skeletons with helmets, found in the depths of the temple of
Athena;[36] for, as we know from Homer, all corpses were burnt and the
ashes were preserved in urns. Of such urns I have found an immense
number in all the pre-Hellenic strata on the hill. Lastly, the Treasure,
which some member of the royal family had probably endeavoured to save
during the destruction of the city, but was forced to abandon, leaves no
doubt that the city was destroyed by the hands of enemies. I found this
Treasure on the large enclosing wall by the side of the royal palace, at
a depth of 27½ feet, and covered with red Trojan ashes from 5 to
6½ feet in depth, above which was a post-Trojan wall of fortification
19½ feet high.

Trusting to the data of the Iliad, the exactness of which I used to
believe in as in the Gospel itself, I imagined that _Hissarlik_, the
hill which I have ransacked for three years, was the Pergamus of the
city, that Troy must have had 50,000 inhabitants, and that its area must
have extended over the whole space occupied by the Greek colony of
Ilium.[37]

Notwithstanding this, I was determined to investigate the matter
accurately, and I thought that I could not do so in any better way than
by making borings. I accordingly began cautiously to dig at the extreme
ends of the Greek Ilium; but these borings down to the native rock
brought to light only walls of houses, and fragments of pottery
belonging to the Greek period,--not a trace of the remains of the
preceding occupants. In making these borings, therefore, I gradually
came nearer to the fancied Pergamus, but without any better success;
till at last as many as seven shafts, which I dug at the very foot of
the hill down to the rock, produced only Greek masonry and fragments of
Greek pottery. I now therefore assert most positively that Troy was
limited to the small surface of this hill; that its area is accurately
marked by its great surrounding wall, laid open by me in many places;
that the city had no Acropolis, and that the Pergamus is a pure
invention of Homer; and further that the area of Troy in post-Trojan
times down to the Greek settlement was only increased so far as the hill
was enlarged by the _débris_ that was thrown down, but that the Ilium of
the Greek colony had a much larger extent at the time of its
foundation.[38]

Though, however, we find on the one hand that we have been deceived in
regard to the size of Troy, yet on the other we must feel great
satisfaction in the certainty, now at length ascertained, that Troy
really existed, that the greater portion of this Troy has been brought
to light by me, and that the Iliad--although on an exaggerated
scale--sings of this city and of the fact of its tragic end. Homer,
however, is no historian, but an epic poet, and hence we must excuse his
exaggerations.

As Homer is so well informed about the topography and the climatic
conditions of the Troad, there can surely be no doubt that he had
himself visited Troy. But, as he was there long after its destruction,
and its site had moreover been buried deep in the _débris_ of the ruined
town, and had for centuries been built over by a new town, Homer could
neither have seen the Great Tower of Ilium nor the Scæan Gate, nor the
great enclosing Wall, nor the palace of Priam; for, as every visitor to
the Troad may convince himself by my excavations, the ruins and red
ashes of Troy alone--forming a layer of from five to ten feet
thick--covered all these remains of immortal fame; and this accumulation
of _débris_ must have been much more considerable at the time of Homer’s
visit. Homer made no excavations so as to bring those remains to light,
but he knew of them from tradition; for the tragic fate of Troy had for
centuries been in the mouths of all minstrels, and the interest attached
to it was so great that, as my excavations have proved, tradition itself
gave the exact truth in many details. Such, for instance, is the memory
of the Scæan Gate in the Great Tower of Ilium, and the constant use of
the name Scæan Gate in the plural, because it had to be described as
double,[39] and in fact it has been proved to be a double gate.
According to the lines in the Iliad (XX. 307, 308), it now seems to me
extremely probable that, at the time of Homer’s visit, the King of Troy
declared that his race was descended in a direct line from Æneas.[40]

Now as Homer never saw Ilium’s Great Tower, nor the Scæan Gate, and
could not imagine that these buildings lay buried deep beneath his feet,
and as he probably imagined Troy to have been very large--according to
the then existing poetical legends--and perhaps wished to describe it
as still larger, we cannot be surprised that he makes Hector descend
from the palace in the Pergamus and hurry through the town in order to
arrive at the Scæan Gate; whereas that gate and Ilium’s Great Tower, in
which it stands, are in reality directly in front of the royal house.
That this house is really the king’s palace seems evident from its size,
from the thickness of its stone walls, in contrast to those of the other
houses of the town, which are built almost exclusively of unburnt
bricks, and from its imposing situation upon an artificial hill directly
in front of or beside the Scæan Gate, the Great Tower, and the great
surrounding Wall. This is confirmed by the many splendid objects found
in its ruins, especially the enormous royally ornamented vase with the
picture of the owl-headed goddess Athena, the tutelary divinity of Ilium
(see No. 219, p. 307); and lastly, above all other things, by the rich
Treasure found close by it (Plate II.). I cannot, of course, prove that
the name of this king, the owner of this treasure, was really PRIAM; but
I give him this name because he is so called by Homer and in all the
traditions. All that I can prove is, that the palace of the owner of
this treasure, this last Trojan king, perished in the great catastrophe,
which destroyed the Scæan Gate, the great surrounding Wall, and the
Great Tower, and which desolated the whole city. I can prove, by the
enormous quantities of red and yellow calcined Trojan ruins, from five
to ten feet in height, which covered and enveloped these edifices, and
by the many post-Trojan buildings, which were again erected upon these
calcined heaps of ruins, that neither the palace of the owner of the
Treasure, nor the Scæan Gate, nor the great surrounding Wall, nor
Ilium’s Great Tower, were ever again brought to light. A city, whose
king possessed such a treasure, was immensely wealthy, considering the
circumstances of those times; and because Troy was rich, it was
powerful, had many subjects, and obtained auxiliaries from all quarters.

Troy had therefore no separate Acropolis; but as one was necessary for
the great deeds of the Iliad, it was added by the poetical invention of
Homer, and called by him Pergamus, a word of quite unknown derivation.

Last year I ascribed the building of the Great Tower of Ilium to the
first occupants of the hill; but I have long since come to the firm
conviction that it is the work of the second people, the Trojans,
because it is upon the north side only, within the Trojan stratum of
ruins, and from 16 to 19½ feet above the native soil, that it is made
of actual masonry. I have, in my letters, repeatedly drawn attention to
the fact, that the terra-cottas which I found upon the Tower can only be
compared with those found at a depth of from 36 to 46 feet. This,
however, applies only to the beauty of the clay and the elegance of the
vessels, but in no way to their types, which, as the reader may convince
himself from the illustrations to this work, are utterly different from
the pottery of the first settlers.

[Illustration: No. 2. Small Trojan Axes of Diorite (8 M.).]

It has been hitherto thought that the occurrence of stone implements
indicates the “Age of Stone.” My excavations here in Troy, however,
prove this opinion to be completely erroneous; for I very frequently
find implements of stone even immediately below the _débris_ belonging
to the Greek colony, that is at a depth of 6½ feet, and they occur in
very great quantities from a depth of 13 feet downwards. Those, however,
in the Trojan _stratum_, from 23 to 33 feet below the surface, are in
general of much better workmanship than those above. I wish to draw
attention to the fact that unfortunately, when writing the present book,
I made the mistake, which is now inconceivable to me, of applying the
name of _wedges_ to those splendidly-cut weapons and implements, the
greater part of which are made of diorite, but frequently also of very
hard and transparent green stone, such as are given here and in several
later illustrations. They are, however, as anyone can convince himself,
not wedges but axes, and the majority of them must have been used as
battle-axes. Many, to judge from their form, seem to be excellently
fitted to be employed as lances, and may have been used as such. I have
collected many hundreds of them. But, together with the thousands of
stone implements, I found also many of copper; and the frequently
discovered moulds of mica-schist for casting copper weapons and
implements, as well as the many small crucibles, and small roughly made
bowls, spoons, and funnels for filling the moulds, prove that this metal
was much used. The strata of copper and lead scoriæ, met with at a depth
of from 28 to 29½ feet, leave no doubt that this was the case. It
must be observed that all the copper articles met with are of pure
copper, without the admixture of any other metal.[41] Even the king’s
Treasure contained, besides other articles made of this metal, a shield
with a large boss in the centre; a great caldron; a kettle or vase; a
long slab with a silver vase welded on to it by the conflagration; and
many fragments of other vases.[42]

[Illustration: PLATE II.

GENERAL VIEW OF THE TREASURE OF PRIAM. (Depth 8½ M.)

  _a._ Key of the Treasure Chest.
  _b._ The Golden Diadems, Fillet, Ear-rings, and Small Jewels.
  _c._ Silver “Talents” and Vessels of Silver and Gold.
  _d._ Silver Vases and curious Plate of Copper.
  _e._ Weapons and Helmet-Crests of Copper or Bronze.
  _f._ Copper Vessel.
  _g._ Copper Caldron.
  _h._ Copper Shield.
]

This Treasure of the supposed mythical king Priam, of the mythical
heroic age, which I discovered at a great depth in the ruins of the
supposed mythical Troy, is at all events a discovery which stands alone
in archæology, revealing great wealth, great civilization and a great
taste for art, in an age preceding the discovery of bronze, when weapons
and implements of pure copper were employed contemporaneously with
enormous quantities of stone weapons and implements. This treasure
further leaves no doubt that Homer must have actually seen gold and
silver articles, such as he continually describes; it is, in every
respect, of inestimable value to science, and will for centuries remain
the object of careful investigation.

Unfortunately upon none of the articles of the Treasure do I find an
inscription, or any other religious symbols, except the 100 idols of the
Homeric “θεὰ γλαυκῶπις Ἀθήνη,” which glitter upon the two diadems and
the four ear-rings. These are, however, an irrefragable proof that the
Treasure belongs to the city and to the age of which Homer sings.

[Illustration: No. 3. (_a_). Inscribed Terra-cotta Vase from the Palace
(8 M.).

(_b_). The Inscription thereon.]

[Illustration: No. 4. Inscribed Terra-cotta Seal (7 M.).]

[Illustration: No. 5. Piece of Red Slate, perhaps a Whetstone, with an
Inscription (7 M.).]

Yet a written language was not wanting at that time. For instance, I
found at a depth of 26 feet, in the royal palace, the vase with an
inscription, of which a drawing is here given; and I wish to call
especial attention to the fact, that of the characters occurring in it,
the letter like the Greek P occurs also in the inscription on a seal,
found at the depth of 23 feet; the second and third letter to the left
of this upon a whorl of terra-cotta,[43] likewise found at a depth of
23 feet; and the third letter also upon two small funnels of
terra-cotta, from a depth of 10 feet (see p. 191). I further found in
the royal palace the excellent engraved inscription on a piece of red
slate; but I see here only one character resembling one of the letters
of the inscription on the above-mentioned seal. My friend the great
Indian scholar, Émile Burnouf, conjectures that all these characters
belong to a very ancient Græco-Asiatic local alphabet. Professor H.
Brunn, of Munich, writes to me that he has shown these inscriptions to
Professor Haug, and that he has pointed out their relationship and
connection with the Phœnician alphabet (from which the Greek alphabet is
however derived), and has found certain analogies between them and the
inscription on the bronze table which was found at Idalium in Cyprus,
and is now in the _Cabinet des Médailles_ in Paris. Professor Brunn adds
that the connection of things found at Troy with those found in Cyprus
is in no way surprising, but may be very well reconciled with Homer, and
that at all events particular attention should be paid to this
connection, for, in his opinion, Cyprus is the cradle of Greek art, or,
so to speak, the caldron in which Asiatic, Egyptian, and Greek
ingredients were brewed together, and out of which, at a later period,
Greek art came forth as the clear product.

I find in these Trojan layers of _débris_ an abundance of splendid
pottery, and more especially large and small cups with two handles, or
with one from below in the form of a crown;[44] vases with rings on the
sides and with holes in the same direction in the lip, for hanging them
up by cords; all kinds of domestic utensils; also a beautifully
ornamented flute made of bone, several pieces of other flutes, and a
splendidly ornamented piece of ivory, which is part of a lyre _with only
four strings_.

[Illustration: No. 6. Terra-cotta Vase Cover (8 M.).]

[Illustration: No. 7. Ornamented Ivory Tube, probably a Trojan Flute (8
M.).]

Like the first settlers on this sacred spot, the Trojans also were of
the Aryan race; for I find among their remains enormous quantities of
the small articles of terra-cotta in the form of volcanoes and tops
(_carrousels_), with carvings of Aryan religious symbols.

[Illustration: No. 8. Piece of ivory, belonging to a Trojan Lyre with
Four Strings (about 8 M.).]

The building materials of the Trojans are of various kinds. With but few
exceptions, all the house-walls which I have uncovered are composed of
unburnt sun-dried bricks, which in the heat of the conflagration have
become a kind of really burnt bricks. But the royal palace and two small
buildings in the depths of the temple of Athena, as well as the Great
Tower of Ilium, the Scæan Gate, and the great enclosing Wall, are
generally composed of unhewn stones joined with earth, the less rough
face of the stones being turned to the outside, so that the walls have a
tolerably smooth appearance.

I thought last year, upon uncovering the Great Tower of Ilium, that it
must have been at one time higher than it now is, namely 6 meters or 20
feet; but its flat-built top beside the Scæan Gate, and the _benches_
(not ruins, as I formerly thought) afterwards found upon it, prove that
it can never have been higher.[45] I would draw especial attention to
the fact, that the masonry of the Scæan Gate, upon being uncovered,
looked as wonderfully fresh as if it had been erected quite recently. It
is quite certain that it possessed strong wooden fortifications, and
probably also a wooden tower above the gateway; for otherwise it is
inexplicable to me how the entrance of the Gate can have been covered to
the height of 10 feet by those red Trojan wood-ashes, and especially how
it was that there, far from the other buildings, the heat should have
been so great that even the thick slabs of stone have been destroyed by
it.

Homer speaks of Troy as having been destroyed by Hercules previous to
the Trojan war,[46] and it will ever remain an enigma to us whether this
information, which had been preserved by traditions down to his time,
really refers to the Ilium of Priam, or to the very ancient town of the
first settlers.

As to the chronology of Troy, we have only the general supposition of
antiquity that the Trojan War occurred about B.C. 1200, and Homer’s
statement (_Iliad_, XX. 215-237) that Dardanus, the first Trojan King,
founded Dardania, which town I agree with Virgil and Euripides in
considering identical with Ilium, and that after him it was governed by
his son Erichthonius, and then by his grandson Tros, by his
great-grandson Ilus, and then by his son Laomedon, and by his grandson
Priam. Even if we allow every one of these six kings a long reign of 33
years, we nevertheless scarcely carry the foundation of the town beyond
1400 B.C., that is 700 years before the Greek colony.

The site of Troy, which at the time of its foundation was 10 meters
(about 33 feet) below the present surface, was only 7 meters (23 feet)
below it after its destruction, when Ilium was again rebuilt by another
people of Aryan origin; for, in the _débris_ of this people, which
extends to a depth of from 7 to 4 meters (23 to 13 feet) below the
present surface, I find the same objects of terra-cotta with religious
symbols.

[Illustration: No. 9. Ornamented Piece of Ivory belonging to a Trojan
Seven-Stringed Lyre (7 M.).]

On the photographic plates of the Atlas I have carefully stated the
depth at which every object was found, so that it is very easy to find
out which of them belong to this people.[47] Their pottery resembles
that of the Trojans, but it is worse and coarser, and we meet with many
new types. Almost all their vases have a tube on either side for hanging
them up by cords. I here found, at a depth of 16½ feet, part of a
lyre made of stone, with six strings; and at a depth of 13 feet the
beautifully ornamented ivory piece of another lyre, with seven strings,
here shown.

The architecture of this people, as may be seen from the many
house-walls which I have uncovered, was always of small stones joined
with earth. Yet in two places in the depths of the temple of Athena
there is a wall of sun-dried bricks, which appears to belong to this
nation. Their houses were smaller, and less wood was employed in their
construction than in those of the Trojans; for, although the ruins of
houses lying one upon another show that several great convulsions have
taken place, still we find here far fewer charred ruins than among those
of the preceding people; nay, these layers of _débris_ have in the
majority of cases a grey or black appearance, and they contain millions
of small mussel-shells, bones, fish-bones, and so forth. It is curious
that in these strata certain types of terra-cottas are only found
exactly at the same depth, and that, for instance, the splendid _black_
cups in the form of an hourglass, and with two large handles, are
confined to a depth of 6 meters (nearly 20 feet).

During the first two years of my excavations, at the depth of from 4 to
7 meters (13 to 23 feet), I found scarcely any copper, and consequently
I believed that the metal was but rarely, if at all, known to this
people. This year, however, I found a number of copper nails in this
stratum, as well as some knives and battle-axes, together with moulds of
mica-schist for casting them, besides other weapons and implements.[48]
Yet copper must have been rare with them; for stone implements, such as
knives of silex, hammers and axes of diorite, and so forth, are found by
thousands.

This people also seem to have disappeared simultaneously with the
destruction of their town; for not only do I find, at a depth of from 4
meters up to 2 meters (13 to 6½ feet), many new types of terra-cotta
vessels, but I no longer find any remains of house-walls; nay, even
single stones are scarcely ever met with. At all events, directly after
its destruction, the town was rebuilt of wood by another tribe of the
Aryan race; for the small terra-cottas, adorned with Aryan religious
symbols, although frequently of new types, occur in numbers in these
layers of _débris_. Walls of fortification are indeed met with in these
depths, but they had been built by the preceding people; as, for
instance, the wall 19½ feet in height, whose base is at a depth of 5
to 6½ feet above the treasure, and which reached to within 1¼ ft.
of the surface. This _wooden Ilium_ was, to all appearance, still less
fortunate than the stone town of its predecessors; for, as is proved by
the numerous calcined layers of _débris_, it was frequently desolated by
fire. Whether these fires broke out accidentally, or were kindled by the
hands of enemies, must for ever remain a riddle to us; but thus much is
certain and evident from the terra-cottas found at these depths, that
the civilization of the people, which had been but slight from the
beginning, continued to decrease during the perpetual misfortunes of
their town. I find, among the ruins of this nation, lances, battle-axes,
and implements, of pure copper, and moulds for casting them; likewise a
number of copper nails, which, however--as in the case of the preceding
peoples who have inhabited this hill--are too long and thin to have been
employed for fastening wood together, and must in all probability have
been used as brooches: this seems to be proved by two nails of this kind
on the top of which I found rows of perforated beads of gold or
_electrum_ soldered upon them. These two copper nails were, it is true,
found immediately below the surface, but they must in any case belong to
the pre-Hellenic time.

In the ruins of this people, at a depth of from 13 to 6½ feet, we
also meet with stone implements, such as hammers, splendidly polished
axes and battle-axes of diorite, but considerably fewer than in the
preceding stratum.

When the surface of the hill was about 2 meters (6½ feet) lower than
it is now, Ilium was built by a Greek colony; and we have already
endeavoured to prove that this settlement must have been founded about
the year 700 B.C. From that time we find the remains of Hellenic
house-walls of large hewn stones joined without cement. From about 1
meter (3¼ feet) below the surface, and upwards, there are also ruins
of buildings, the stones of which are joined with cement or lime. We
also meet with great numbers of copper coins of Ilium of the time of the
Roman empire, from Augustus to Constans II. and Constantine II.;
likewise older Ilian coins with the image of Athena, and medals of
Alexandria Troas; also with some coins of Tenedos, Ophrynium and Sigeum,
in some few cases at 3¼ feet, but generally at less than 20 inches
below the surface. I once remarked erroneously that Byzantine coins were
also met with here near the surface. But in my three years’ excavations
I have not found a single medal of a later date than Constans II. and
Constantine II., except two bad coins belonging to a Byzantine
monastery, which may have been lost by shepherds; and, as there is here
not the remotest trace of Byzantine masonry or of Byzantine pottery, it
may be regarded as certain that the Ilium of the Greek colony was
destroyed towards the middle of the fourth century after Christ, and
that no village, much less a town, has ever again been built upon its
site. The wall I mentioned in my memoir of the 1st of March, 1873,[49]
as consisting of Corinthian pillars joined with cement, and which I
believed to have belonged to the Middle Ages, must be referred to the
time of Constantine I. or to Constans II., when the temple of Athena was
destroyed by the pious zeal of the first Christians.

Of the walls and fortifications of the Greek colony, almost the only
portions that have been preserved are those which were apparently built
by Lysimachus. The lower and prominent portion of the wall of the Tower
belongs to more ancient times, probably to the beginning of the Greek
colony. Of great political convulsions or catastrophes there seem now to
have been but few or none at all; for the accumulation of _débris_
during the long duration of the Greek colony, about 10½ centuries,
amounts only to 2 meters (6½ feet).

Curiously enough, I find extremely little metal in the _débris_ of the
Greek colony. Half-a-dozen scythe-shaped knives, a double-edged axe,
about two dozen nails, a cup, a few lances and arrows, are pretty nearly
all that I discovered. I have described these objects in my memoirs as
made of copper; but upon a more careful examination they have been found
to be bronze, and pure copper is no longer met with in the Greek colony.
The only objects of iron which I found were a key of curious shape, and
a few arrows and nails, close to the surface. From Homer we know that
the Trojans also possessed iron, as well as the metal which he calls
κύανος, and which, even in antiquity, was translated by χάλυψ (steel). I
am sure, however, that I have not discovered even a trace of this metal,
either among the Trojan ruins or among those of any of the other nations
which preceded the Greek colony on the hill.[50] Yet articles of iron
and steel may have existed: I believe positively that they did exist:
but they have vanished without leaving a trace of their existence; for,
as we know, iron and steel become decomposed much more readily than
copper. Of tin, which Homer so repeatedly mentions, I found of course no
trace: this metal, as we know, is corroded very rapidly even when lying
in a dry locality. Lead is found in the ruins of all the different
nations which have inhabited the hill; but, among those which preceded
the Greek settlement, it is found principally in lumps of a
hemispherical form. I find it first in general use only in the Greek
colony, where it was employed as a means for uniting stones in building.

[Illustration:

PLATE III.

BLOCK OF TRIGLYPHS, WITH METOPÉ OF THE SUN-GOD.

_Page 32._

From the Temple of Apollo in the Ruins of Greek Ilium.]

To judge from the area of the Ilium of the Greek colony,[51] it may have
possessed 100,000 inhabitants. It must in its best days have been very
rich, and the plastic art must have attained a high degree of perfection
here. Accordingly the site of the town, which is covered with abundant
relics of grand buildings, is strewn with fragments of excellent
sculptures, and the splendid block of triglyphs--6½ feet in length
and 2 feet 10 inches in height, with a _metopé_ which represents Phœbus
Apollo with the four horses of the Sun--is one of the most glorious
masterpieces that have been preserved from the time when Greek art was
in its zenith. I discovered it in the depths of the temple of Apollo,
and it now adorns my garden at Athens. In describing this treasure of
art in my memoir of the 18th of June, 1872,[52] directly after having
discovered it, I made the remark that it must have belonged to the time
of Lysimachus, that is to say to about the year 306 B.C. I sent a
plaster cast of it to the Museum of Casts in Munich, and the Director of
the Museum, Professor H. Brunn, who is certainly one of the greatest
authorities in the world respecting the plastic works of antiquity,
wrote me the following communication with regard to it. “Even
photographs furnish no adequate means of judging of plastic works, and,
in the present case, the cast alone has quite convinced me that this
work must be judged much more favourably than it has been in the
‘Archäologische Zeitung.’ I do not venture to speak decidedly about the
triglyphs: the history of the Doric style after the time of the
Parthenon and the Propylæa is still utterly obscure: yet the straight
cutting of the channellings can certainly be referred to pre-Roman
times. Of external criteria the halo of rays is the only one. According
to the investigations of Stephani,[53] this first occurs about the time
of Alexander the Great. For the special form of long and short rays, we
have the coins of Alexander I., of Epirus and of Ceos (Carthæa),
mentioned by Curtius. The most recent example that I have as yet found
is the Hades vase of Canosa, in our Museum, which belongs _at latest_ to
the second century before Christ; hence the extreme termini for the
relief would be about the end of the fourth and the middle of the second
centuries. The composition, as a work of art, shows the greatest skill
in solving one of the most difficult problems. For the team of four
horses ought _not_ to move on the surface of the relief, but to appear
as if it came out of it in a half-turn. This has been attained
principally by making the right hinder thigh of the horse in the
foreground pressed back while the left foot steps forward, and moreover
this same horse is slightly foreshortened, and the surface of the thigh
lies deeper than the upper surface of the triglyphs, while, on the other
hand, the surfaces of the withers and of the neck are higher, and the
head, in conformity with the rules of Greek reliefs, is again almost
parallel with the base. For this reason there is no indication of a
chariot, which has to be imagined as concealed by the foremost horse.
Moreover the position of the god is half turned forwards, slightly
following that of the head, and here also the arm is again strongly
turned inwards, but not so as to bring the position in conflict with the
rules of relief. If the encroachment of the head on the upper border of
the triglyph is considered inaccurate, I find in this a very happy
thought, which may remind us of the differently conceived pediment of
the Parthenon, where only the head and shoulders of Helios rise out of
the chariot still under the ocean. Helios here, so to speak, bursts
forth from the gates of day and sheds the light of his glory over all.
These are beauties peculiar only to Greek art in the fulness of its
power. The execution corresponds perfectly with the excellence of the
ideas, and thus I do not hesitate to place the relief nearer to the
commencement than to the end of the above limited space of time. If,
therefore, for other reasons, you believe it to belong to the time of
Lysimachus, I, from an archæological point of view, have no objection to
make against the supposition, but I rejoice to see our treasure of
monuments enriched by an original from those times.”

[Illustration: Terra-cotta Covers of Vases, with the Owl’s Face.

No. 10.--From 3 M.

No. 11.--From 2 M.

No. 12.--From 7 M. Interesting for _depth_ and _form_.
]

[Illustration: No. 13. Terra-cotta Vase, marked with an Aryan symbol (6
M.).]

I have already proved the relationship of the four different peoples,
who inhabited the site of Troy before the arrival of the Greek colony,
by the small terra-cottas in the form of volcanoes and tops which are
met with in quantities in all of the strata, and by the similarity of
the Aryan religious symbols engraved upon them. I prove this
relationship further, and above all, by the plastic representations of
Athena, the owl-faced tutelary goddess of Ilium, for this representation
is common to all the four nations which preceded the Greek colony.
Immediately below the strata of the last, at a depth of 2 meters (6½
feet), I found this owl’s face upon terra-cotta cups with a kind of
helmet, which likewise occur in all the succeeding layers of _débris_ to
a depth of 12 meters (39½ feet), and are of very frequent occurrence
down to a depth of 9 meters (29½ feet). These cups may, as my learned
friend Émile Burnouf thinks, have served only as lids to the vases which
occur contemporaneously with them, and which have two up-raised wings,
and the breasts and abdomen of a woman, for they fit these vases
perfectly. I found likewise in all the layers of _débris_, from a depth
of 3 meters (nearly 10 feet) down to a depth of 10 meters (33 feet),
vases with owls’ faces, two upraised wings (not arms, as I formerly
thought), and the two large breasts and abdomen of a woman, and even, at
a depth of 6 meters (nearly 20 feet), a vase upon which the navel is
ornamented with a cross and four nails. As far down as a depth of 14
meters (46 feet) I found the upper portion of a vase and the fragment of
a dish adorned with owls’ faces. Besides these, in all the layers of
_débris_, from a depth of 6½ feet downwards, as far as the primary
soil, there were found idols of very fine marble, of bone, of
mica-schist, of slate, and even of ordinary limestone, which are from
¼ of an inch to 7¼ inches in length, and from 0·6 of an inch to 4·8
inches in breadth. Upon a great many of these there is an owl’s face,
and some have even long female hair engraved upon them; many also have a
woman’s girdle. As upon several of the idols, upon which I find the
owl’s head, it is not cut, but represented in a red or black colour, I
presume that this was once the case with all the idols which now possess
no indications of an owl, and that the colour upon these latter has been
destroyed by damp, during the course of thousands of years. Upon several
idols of marble and bone there are mere indications of wings on the
sides. But I also find the petrified vertebra of an antediluvian animal
upon which the Trojans have carved a large owl’s head. Further, at a
depth of 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 14 meters (10, 13, 20, 23, 26, 30 and 46
feet), I found twelve idols of terra-cotta, and all, with only one
exception, have owls’ faces upon them; most of them also have the two
breasts of a woman, and upon the back traces of long female hair. One of
these owl-headed idols has the form of a vessel, with a funnel on each
side in the shape of a smaller vessel; the front part of the body of the
goddess, up to the neck, is covered by a long shield, and on the back of
the body there is the long female hair hanging down, like that of the
Karyatides in the Acropolis of Athens. Upon several of these terra-cotta
idols there are indications of wings.

[Illustration:

  14. 14 M.
  15. 9 M.
  16. 8 M.
  17. 4 M.
  18. 9 M.
  19. 14 M.
  20. 8 M.
  21. 7 M.
  22.
  23. 6 M.
  24. 9 M.
  25. 10 M.
  26. 10 M.
  27. 2 M.
  28. 10 M.
  29. 5 M.
  30.

Nos. 14-30. Rude Idols found in the various Strata (2 to 14 M.).

No. 14 is of Ivory, with the same Decorations on both sides. Nos. 15,
16, 18, 20, 25, 26, 28, are of very fine Marble. No. 17 is of Green
Slate. Nos. 23, 24, 27 are of Terra-cotta: and No. 19 is a Piece of a
Dish.]

[Illustration: No. 31. Remarkable Trojan Terra-cotta Vase, representing
the Ilian Athena (9 M.).]

These owl-faced female figures, which occur so frequently upon the cups,
vases and idols, can represent but one goddess, and this goddess can be
none other than Athena, _the tutelary goddess of Troy_, all the more so
as Homer continually calls her “θεὰ γλαυκῶπις Ἀθήνη;” for “γλαυκῶπις”
has been wrongly translated by the scholars of every century, and does
not signify “with bright and sparkling eyes,” but “_with the face of an
owl_.” The natural conclusion, in the first place, is that Homer
perfectly well knew that the owl-faced Athena was the tutelary goddess
of Troy; secondly, that the locality whose depths I have ransacked for
three years must be the spot “ubi Troja fuit;” and thirdly, that, in the
progress of civilization, Pallas Athena received a human face, and her
former owl’s head was transformed into her favourite bird, the owl,
which as such is quite unknown to Homer. At a depth of from 4 to 9
meters (13 to 29½ feet), I also found some vases and cups with a
human face, but which have a good deal of the owl about them.

As I did not find a trace of the owl’s face among the ruins of the Greek
colony, we may regard it as certain that it had already advanced beyond
the civilization of the old Ilians of whose town it took possession, and
that it brought the idea of the goddess with a human face with it to
Troy.

With regard to the often mentioned perforated terra-cottas in the form
of a top and the crater of a volcano, adorned with Aryan religious
symbols, it is possible that their original form was that of a wheel,
for they occur frequently in this shape upon the primary rock at a depth
of from 14 to 16 meters (46 to 52½ feet).[54] In the upper layers of
_débris_, these objects in the form of wheels are indeed rare, but the
representation of the wheel in motion, effected by the incisions being
more numerous, still occurs very frequently.[55] In spite of all my
searching and pondering, I have not yet succeeded in arriving at an
opinion as to what these extremely interesting objects were used for. As
has now become evident by the excavation of the temple of Athena, it is
only among the pre-Hellenic peoples that they were adorned with Aryan
symbols. In the Greek colony these occur but rarely; they are of a
different form, and they possess no trace of carved decorations; instead
of these, we find the much larger objects of terra-cotta, round, and
twice perforated, which occasionally bear the mark of a kind of
stamp.[56]

Through the kindness of my friend Professor Giuseppe G. Bianconi in
Bologna, I have received the drawings of ten similar round articles of
terra-cotta in the form of the top or volcano, which are preserved in
the Museum of Modena, and were found in the terramares of that district,
in the lake-habitations of the stone age. To my extreme astonishment, I
found that six of them possessed the same ornamental carvings which I
found upon the articles of the same form here in Troy. Three of them
have a circle round the central sun, a triple cross, which, as I have
endeavoured minutely to explain in my sixth memoir, was the symbol of
the two pieces of wood of our Aryan forefathers for producing the holy
fire, and is an emblem of the highest importance. The fourth represents
one of these machines for producing fire with five ends, and Indian
scholars may possibly find that one of the staves represents the piece
of wood called “pramantha,” with which fire was generated by friction,
and which the Greeks at a later time transformed into their Prometheus,
who, as they imagined, stole fire from heaven. The fifth represents a
somewhat different form of the fire producer of our remote ancestors;
and the sixth has twelve circles round the central sun. Probably these
are the twelve stations of the sun which are so frequently mentioned in
the Rigvêda, and which are personified by the twelve Adityas, the sons
of Adity (the Indivisible or Infinite Space), and represent the twelve
signs of the Zodiac.

The same friend has also sent me drawings of eighteen similar round
terra-cottas found in the graves of the cemetery in Villanova, and now
in the Museum of Count Gozzadini in Bologna. As the count found an “aes
rude” in one of the graves, he thinks that the cemetery, like it,
belongs to the time of King Numa, that is, to about 700 years before
Christ. G. de Mortillet,[57] however, ascribes a much greater age to the
cemetery. But, at all events, fifteen of the eighteen drawings lying
before me have a modern appearance compared with the ten in the Museum
of Modena, and compared with my small terra-cottas in the form of tops,
volcanoes, and wheels, found in Troy; for not only the decorations, but
the forms also of the articles are very much more elaborate. Only three
of the eighteen articles show a shape and decorations like those met
with in Troy. All three have the form of a top: the first has seven suns
in a circle round the central sun; the second has two crosses, one of
which is formed by four stars, the other by four lines. The third has
five triangles and five stars in the circle round the central point. The
comparison of these eighteen articles with those from Troy convinces me
that Count Gozzadini is right in ascribing no greater age to the
cemetery of Villanova than 700 B.C.

But besides the articles ornamented with religious symbols, we meet in
Troy with thousands of terra-cottas of a similar, but in most cases more
lengthened form, with no decorations whatever; at a depth of 3 metres
(10 feet), they occur also in the shape of cones.[58] Formerly, at a
depth of 10 feet, I found similar pieces in blue or green stone, which I
have also recently met with frequently at a depth of from 23 to 33 feet.
Among the unembellished terra-cottas of this description I find some,
but scarcely more than 2 per cent., which show signs of wear, and may
have been used on spindles. The pieces adorned with carvings, on the
other hand, never show signs of any kind of wear, and the symbols
engraved upon them are filled with white clay so as to make them more
striking to the eye.[59] This white clay must have disappeared
directly, if the pieces had been used on spindles or as coins. They
cannot have been worn as amulets, on account of their size and weight: I
am therefore forced to believe that they were employed as offerings, or
that they were worshipped as idols of the Sun, whose image is seen in
the centre.

Unfortunately, owing to the great extent of my excavations, the hurry in
which they were carried on, and the hardness of the _débris_, by far the
greater portion of the terra-cotta vessels found by me in the depths of
Ilium were brought out more or less broken. But everything that could in
any way be repaired I have restored by means of shell-lac and gypsum,
and in this state they are represented in the drawings.[60] In all cases
where I found a piece broken off and wanting, I restored it according to
the model of other vessels of the same kind which I obtained in an
unbroken condition; but where such models were wanting, or where I had
the slightest doubt, I did not attempt to restore the articles.

The town of Ilium, upon whose site I have been digging for more than
three years, boasted itself to be the successor of Troy; and as
throughout antiquity the belief in the identity of its site with that of
the ancient city of Priam was firmly established and not doubted by
anyone, it is clear that the whole course of tradition confirms this
identity. At last Strabo lifted up his voice against it; though, as he
himself admits, he had never visited the Plain of Troy, and he trusted
to the accounts of Demetrius of Scepsis, which were suggested by vanity.
According to Strabo,[61] this Demetrius maintained that his native town
of Scepsis had been the residence of Æneas, and he envied Ilium the
honour of having been the metropolis of the Trojan kingdom. He
therefore put forward the following view of the case:--that Ilium and
its environs did not contain space enough for the great deeds of the
Iliad; that the whole plain which separated the city from the sea was
alluvial land, and that it was not formed until after the time of the
Trojan war. As another proof that the locality of the two cities could
not be the same, he adds that Achilles and Hector ran three times round
Troy, whereas one could not run round Ilium on account of the continuous
mountain ridge (διὰ τὴν συνεχῆ ῥάχην). For all of these reasons he says
that ancient Troy must be placed on the site of the “Village of the
Ilians” (Ἰλιέων κώμη), 30 stadia or 3 geographical miles from Ilium and
42 stadia from the coast, although he is obliged to admit that not the
faintest trace of the city has been preserved.[62]

Strabo, with his peculiarly correct judgment, would assuredly have
rejected all these erroneous assertions of Demetrius of Scepsis, had he
himself visited the Plain of Troy, for they can easily be refuted.

I have to remark that it is quite easy to run round the site of Troy;
further, that the distance from Ilium to the coast, in a straight line,
is about 4 miles, while the distance in a straight line north-west to
the promontory of Sigeum (and at this place tradition, as late as
Strabo’s time, fixed the site of the Greek encampment) amounts to about
4½ miles. For Strabo says:[63] “Next to Rhœteum may be seen the
ruined town of Sigeum, the port of the Achæans, the Achæan camp, and the
marsh or lake called Stomalimne, and the mouth of the Scamander.”

In November, 1871, I made excavations upon the site of the “Ἰλιέων
κώμη,” the results of which completely refute the theory of Demetrius of
Scepsis; for I found everywhere the primary soil at a depth of less
than a foot and a half; and the continuous ridge on the one side of the
site, which appeared to contain the ruins of a large town-wall,
consisted of nothing but pure granulated earth, without any admixture of
ruins.

In the year 1788, Lechevalier visited the plain of Troy, and was so
enthusiastically in favour of the theory that the site of Homer’s Troy
was to be found at the village of Bunarbashi and the heights behind it,
that he disdained to investigate the site of Ilium: this is evident from
his work ‘Voyage de la Troade’ (3e éd., Paris, 1802) and from the
accompanying map, in which he most absurdly calls this very ancient town
“Ilium Novum,” and transposes it to the other side of the Scamander,
beside _Kumkaleh_, close to the sea and about 4 miles from its true
position. This theory, that the site of Troy can only be looked for in
the village of Bunarbashi and upon the heights behind it, was likewise
maintained by the following scholars: by Rennell, ‘Observations on the
Topography of the Plain of Troy’ (London, 1814); by P. W. Forchhammer in
the ‘Journal of the Royal Geographical Society,’ vol. xii., 1842; by
Mauduit, ‘Découvertes dans la Troade’ (Paris et Londres, 1840); by
Welcker, ‘Kleine Schriften;’ by Texier; by Choiseul-Gouffrier, ‘Voyage
Pittoresque de la Grèce’ (1820); by M. G. Nikolaïdes (Paris, 1867); and
by Ernst Curtius in his lecture delivered at Berlin in November, 1871,
after his journey to the Troad and Ephesus, whither he was accompanied
by Professors Adler and Müllenhof, and by Dr. Hirschfeldt. But, as I
have explained in detail in my work, ‘Ithaque, le Péloponnèse et Troie’
(Paris, 1869), this theory is in every respect in direct opposition to
all the statements of the Iliad. My excavations at Bunarbashi prove,
moreover, that no town can ever have stood there; for I find everywhere
the pure virgin soil at a depth of less than 5 feet, and generally
immediately below the surface. I have likewise proved, by my excavations
on the heights behind this village, that human dwellings can never have
existed there; for I found the native rock nowhere at a greater depth
than a foot and a half. This is further confirmed by the sometimes
pointed, sometimes abrupt, and always anomalous form of the rocks which
are seen wherever they are not covered with earth. At half-an-hour’s
distance behind Bunarbashi there is, it is true, the site of quite a
small town, encircled on two sides by precipices and on the other by the
ruins of a surrounding wall, which town I formerly considered to be
Scamandria; but one of the inscriptions found in the ruins of the temple
of Athena in the Ilium of the Greek colony makes me now believe with
certainty that the spot above Bunarbashi is not the site of Scamandria,
but of Gergis. Moreover, the accumulation of _débris_ there is extremely
insignificant, and the naked rock protrudes not only in the small
Acropolis, but also in very many places of the site of the little town.
Further, in all cases where there is an accumulation of _débris_, I
found fragments of Hellenic pottery, and of Hellenic pottery only, down
to the primary soil. As archæology cannot allow the _most ancient_ of
these fragments to be any older than from 500 to 600 years before
Christ, the walls of the small town--which used to be regarded as of the
same age as those of Mycenæ--can certainly be no older than 500 to 600
B.C. at most.

Immediately below this little town there are three tombs of heroes, one
of which has been assigned to Priam, another to Hector, because it was
built entirely of small stones. The latter grave was laid open in
October 1872, by Sir John Lubbock, who found it to contain nothing but
painted fragments of Hellenic pottery to which the highest date that can
be assigned is 300 B.C.; and these fragments tell us the age of the tomb
likewise.

The late Consul J. G. von Hahn, who in May 1864, in his extensive
excavations of the acropolis of Gergis down to the primary soil, only
discovered the same, and nothing but exactly the same, fragments of
Hellenic pottery as I found there in my small excavations, writes in his
pamphlet, ‘Die Ausgrabungen des Homerischen Pergamos:’ “In spite of the
diligent search which my companions and I made on the extensive northern
slope of the Balidagh, from the foot of the acropolis (of Gergis) to the
springs of Bunarbashi, we could not discover any indication beyond the
three heroic tombs, that might have pointed to a former human
settlement, not even antique fragments of pottery and pieces of
brick,--those never-failing, and consequently imperishable, proofs of an
ancient settlement. No pillars or other masonry, no ancient square
stones, no quarry in the natural rock, no artificial levelling of the
rock; on all sides the earth was in its natural state and had not been
touched by human hands.”

The erroneous theory which assigns Troy to the heights of Bunarbashi
could, in fact, never have gained ground, had its above-named advocates
employed the few hours which they spent on the heights, and in
Bunarbashi itself, in making small holes, with the aid of even a single
workman.

Clarke and Barker Webb (Paris, 1844) maintained that Troy was situated
on the hills of _Chiplak_. But unfortunately they also had not given
themselves the trouble to make excavations there; otherwise they would
have convinced themselves, with but very little trouble, that all the
hills in and around Chiplak, as far as the surrounding Wall of Ilium,
contain only the pure native soil.

H. N. Ulrichs[64] maintains that Troy was situated on the hills of
_Atzik-Kioï_, which in my map I have called _Eski Akshi köi_. But I have
examined these hills also, and found that they consist of the pure
native soil. I used a spade in making these excavations, but a
pocket-knife would have answered the purpose.

I cannot conceive how it is possible that the solution of the great
problem, “ubi Troja fuit"--which is surely one of the greatest interest
to the whole civilized world--should have been treated so superficially
that, after a few hours’ visit to the Plain of Troy, men have sat down
at home and written voluminous works to defend a theory, the
worthlessness of which they would have perceived had they but made
excavations for a single hour.

I am rejoiced that I can mention with praise Dr. Wilhelm Buchner,[65]
Dr. G. von Eckenbrecher,[66] and C. MacLaren,[67] who, although they
made no excavations, have nevertheless in their excellent treatises
proved by many irrefutable arguments that the site of Ilium, where I
have been digging for more than three years, corresponds with all the
statements of the Iliad in regard to the site of Troy, and that the
ancient city must be looked for there and nowhere else.

It is also with gratitude that I think of the great German scholar, who
unfortunately succumbed five years ago to his unwearied exertions,
Julius Braun, the advocate of the theory that Homer’s Troy was to be
found only on the site of Ilium, in the depths of the hill of HISSARLIK.
I most strongly recommend his excellent work, ‘Die Geschichte der Kunst
in ihrem Entwickelungsgang,’ to all those who are interested in whatever
is true, beautiful and sublime.

Neither can I do otherwise than gratefully mention my honoured friend,
the celebrated Sanscrit scholar and unwearied investigator Émile
Burnouf, the Director of the French school in Athens, who personally,
and through his many excellent works, especially the one published last
year, ‘La Science des Religions,’ has given me several suggestions,
which have enabled me to decipher many of the Trojan symbols.[68]

It is also with a feeling of gratitude that I think of my honoured
friend, the most learned Greek whom I have ever had the pleasure of
knowing, Professor Stephanos Kommanoudes, in Athens, who has supported
me with his most valuable advice whenever I was in need of it. In like
manner I here tender my cordial thanks to my honoured friend the Greek
Consul of the Dardanelles, G. Dokos, who showed me many kindnesses
during my long excavations.

I beg to draw especial attention to the fact that, in the neighbourhood
of Troy, several types of very ancient pottery--like those found in my
excavations at a depth of from 10 to 33 feet--have been preserved down
to the present day. For instance, in the crockery-shops on the shores of
the Dardanelles there are immense numbers of earthen vessels with long
upright necks and the breasts of a woman, and others in the shape of
animals. In spite of their gilding and other decorations, these vessels
cannot, either in regard to quality or elegance of form, be compared
with the Ilian terra-cottas, not even with those from a depth of 10
feet; but still they furnish a remarkable proof of the fact that, in
spite of manifold political changes, certain types of terra-cottas can
continue in existence in one district for more than 3000 years.

[Illustration: No. 32. The largest of the Terra-cotta Vases found in the
Royal Palace of Troy. Height 20 inches. The Cover was found near it.]

After long and mature deliberation, I have arrived at the firm
conviction that all of those vessels--met with here in great numbers at
a depth of from 10 to 33 feet, and more especially in the Trojan layer
of _débris_, at a depth of from 23 to 33 feet--which have the exact
shape of a bell and a coronet beneath, so that they can only stand upon
their mouth, and which I have hitherto described as cups, must
necessarily, and perhaps even exclusively, have been used as _lids_ to
the numerous terra-cotta vases with a smooth neck and on either side two
ear-shaped decorations, between which are two mighty wings, which, as
they are hollowed and taper away to a point, can never have served as
handles, the more so as between the ear-shaped decorations there is a
small handle on either side. Now, as the latter resembles an owl’s beak,
and especially as this is seen between the ear-shaped ornaments, it was
doubtless intended to represent the image of the owl with upraised wings
on each side of the vases, which image received a noble appearance from
the splendid lid with a coronet. I give a drawing of the largest vase of
this type, which was found a few days ago in the royal palace at a
depth of from 28 to 29½ feet; on the top of it I have placed the
bell-shaped lid with a coronet, which was discovered close by and
appears to have belonged to it.

My friend M. Landerer, Professor of Chemistry in Athens, who has
carefully examined the colours of the Trojan antiquities, writes to me
as follows:--“In the first place, as to the vessels themselves, some
have been turned upon a potter’s wheel, some have been moulded by the
hand. Their _ground-colour_ varies according to the nature of the
_clay_. I find some of them made of black, deep-brown, red, yellowish,
and ashy-grey clay. All of these kinds of clay, which the Trojan potters
used for their ware, consist of clay containing oxide of iron and silica
(_argile silicieuse ferrugineuse_), and, according to the stronger or
weaker mode of burning, the oxide of iron in the clay became more or
less oxidised: thus the black, brown, red, yellow, or grey colour is
explained by the oxidation of the iron. The beautiful black gloss of the
vessels found upon the native soil, at a depth of 46 feet, does not
contain any oxide of lead, but consists of _coal-black_
(_Kohlenschwarz_),[69] which was melted together with the clay and
penetrated into its pores. This can be explained by the clay vessels
having been placed in slow furnaces in which resinous wood was burnt,
and where there was consequently dense smoke, which descended upon the
earthenware in the form of the finest powder and was likewise burnt into
the clay. It is also possible, but by no means probable, that they used
a black pitch or asphalt, which was dissolved in oil of turpentine;
perhaps they used liquid pitch, and painted the vessels with it. The
burning of these would likewise produce coal-black, which in later times
was called the _Atramentum indelibile_ of Apelles. This is the manner in
which colour and gloss were given to Hellenic terra-cottas.

[Illustration: No. 33. Inscribed Trojan Vase of Terra-cotta (8½ M.).]

[Illustration: No. 34. Inscription on the Vase No. 33.]

“The white colour with which the engraved decorations of the Trojan
terra-cottas were filled, by means of a pointed instrument, is nothing
but pure white clay. In like manner, the painting on the potsherd given
above,[70] is made with white clay, and with black clay containing coal.
The brilliant red colour of the large two-handled vessels (δέπα
ἀμφικύπελλα)[71] is no peculiar colour, but merely oxide of iron, which
is a component part of the clay of which the cups were made. Many of the
brilliant yellow Trojan vessels, I find, are made of grey clay, and
painted over with a mass of yellow clay containing oxide of iron; they
were then polished with one of those sharp pieces of diorite which are
so frequently met with in Troy, and afterwards burnt.

The large marshes lying before the site of Ἰλιέων κώμη, and discussed in
my second memoir, have long since been drained, and thus the estate of
Thymbria (formerly Batak) has acquired 240 acres of rich land. As might
have been expected, they were not found to contain any hot springs, but
only three springs of cold water.

In my twenty-second memoir I have mentioned a Trojan vase, with a row of
signs running round it, which I considered to be symbolical, and
therefore did not have them specially reproduced by photography.
However, as my learned friend Émile Burnouf is of opinion that they form
a real inscription in Chinese letters,[72] I give them here according to
his drawing.

M. Burnouf explains them as follows:--

[Illustration:

  1        2            3              4     5         6               7
  puisse   (la) terre   faire germer   dix   labours   dix   .

  8     9     10                                                      11
  dix   dix   dix   pièces d’étoffes
  \----mille----/
]

and adds: “Les caractères du petit vase ne sont ni grecs ni sanscrits,
ni phéniciens, ni, ni, ni--ils sont parfaitement lisibles en chinois!!!
Ce vase peut être venu en Troade de l’Asie septentrional, dont tout le
Nord était touranien.” Characters similar to those given above
frequently occur, more especially upon the perforated terra-cottas in
the form of volcanoes and tops.

As the Turkish papers have charged me in a shameful manner with having
acted against the letter of the firman granted to me, in having kept the
Treasure for myself instead of sharing it with the Turkish Government, I
find myself obliged to explain here, in a few words, how it is that I
have the most perfect right to that treasure. It was only in order to
spare Safvet Pacha, the late Minister of Public Instruction, that I
stated in my first memoir, that at my request, and in the interest of
science, he had arranged for the portion of Hissarlik, which belonged to
the two Turks in Kum-Kaleh, to be bought by the Government. But the true
state of the case is this. Since my excavations here in the beginning of
April 1870, I had made unceasing endeavours to buy this field, and at
last, after having travelled three times to Kum-Kaleh simply with this
object, I succeeded in beating the two proprietors down to the sum of
1000 francs (40_l._) Then, in December 1870, I went to Safvet Pacha at
Constantinople, and told him that, after eight months’ vain endeavours,
I had at last succeeded in arranging for the purchase of the principal
site of Troy for 1000 francs, and that I should conclude the bargain as
soon as he would grant me permission to excavate the field. He knew
nothing about Troy or Homer; but I explained the matter to him briefly,
and said that I hoped to find there antiquities of immense value to
science. He, however, thought that I should find a great deal of gold,
and therefore wished me to give him all the details I could, and then
requested me to call again in eight days. When I returned to him, I
heard to my horror that he had already compelled the two proprietors to
sell him the field for 600 francs (24_l._), and that I might make
excavations there if I wished, but that everything I found must be given
up to him. I told him in the plainest language what I thought of his
odious and contemptible conduct, and declared that I would have nothing
more to do with him, and that I should make no excavations.

But through Mr. Wyne McVeagh, at that time the American Consul, he
repeatedly offered to let me make excavations, on condition that I
should give him only one-half of the things found. At the persuasion of
that gentleman I accepted the offer, on condition that I should have the
right to carry away my half out of Turkey. But the right thus conceded
to me was revoked in April 1872, by a ministerial decree, in which it
was said that I was not to export any part of my share of the discovered
antiquities, but that I had the right to sell them in Turkey. The
Turkish Government, by this new decree, broke our written contract in
the fullest sense of the word, and I was released from every obligation.
Hence I no longer troubled myself in the slightest degree about the
contract which was broken without any fault on my part. I kept
everything valuable that I found for myself, and thus saved it for
science; and I feel sure that the whole civilized world will approve of
my having done so. The new-discovered Trojan antiquities, and especially
the Treasure, far surpass my most sanguine expectations, and fully repay
me for the contemptible trick which Safvet Pacha played me, as well as
for the continual and unpleasant presence of a Turkish official during
my excavations, to whom I was forced to pay 4¾ francs a day.

It was by no means because I considered it to be my duty, but simply to
show my friendly intentions, that I presented the Museum in
Constantinople with seven large vases, from 5 to 6½ feet in height,
and with four sacks of stone implements. I have thus become the only
benefactor the Museum has ever had; for, although all firmans are
granted upon the express condition that one-half of the discovered
antiquities shall be given to the Museum, yet it has hitherto never
received an article from anyone. The reason is that the Museum is
anything but open to the public, and the sentry frequently refuses
admittance even to its Director, so everyone knows that the antiquities
sent there would be for ever lost to science.

The great Indian scholar, Max Müller of Oxford, has just written to me
in regard to the owl-headed tutelary divinity of Troy. “Under all
circumstances, the owl-headed idol cannot be made to explain the idea of
the goddess. The ideal conception and the naming of the goddess came
first; and in that name the owl’s head, whatever it may mean, is
figurative or ideal. In the idol the figurative intention is forgotten,
just as the sun is represented with a golden hand, whereas the ideal
conception of ‘golden-handed’ was ‘spreading his golden rays.’ An
owl-headed deity was most likely intended for a deity of the morning or
the dawn, the owl-light; to change it into a human figure with an owl’s
head was the work of a later and more materializing age.”

I completely agree with this. But it is evident from this that the
Trojans, or at least the first settlers on the hill, spoke Greek, for if
they took the epithet of their goddess, “γλαυκῶπις,” from the ideal
conception which they formed of her and in later times changed it into
an owl-headed female figure, they must necessarily have known that γλαῦξ
meant _owl_, and ὠπή _face_. That the transformation took place many
centuries, and probably more than 1000 years, before Homer’s time, is
moreover proved by owls’ heads occurring on the vases and even in the
monograms in the lowest strata of the predecessors of the Trojans, even
at a depth of 46 feet.

I have still to draw attention to the fact, that in looking over my
Trojan collection from a depth of 2 meters (6½ feet), I find 70 very
pretty brilliant black or red terra-cottas, with or without engraved
decorations, which, both in quality and form, have not the slightest
resemblance either to the Greek or to the pre-historic earthenware. Thus
it seems that just before the arrival of the Greek colony yet another
tribe inhabited this hill for a short time.[73] These pieces of
earthenware may be recognised by the two long-pointed handles of the
large channelled cups, which also generally possess three or four small
horns.

DR. HENRY SCHLIEMANN.

[Illustration: No. 35. Fragment of a second painted Vase, from the
Trojan Stratum.

(From a new Drawing.)]

COMPARATIVE TABLE OF FRENCH METERS AND ENGLISH MEASURES, EXACT AND
APPROXIMATE.

  +-----+-----------+-------------+-----------------+
  |  M. |  Inches.  | Ft. Inches. |  Approximate.   |
  |     |           |             | 1 M. = 3¼ ft.   |
  +-----+-----------+-------------+-----------------+
  |     |           |             |    Feet.        |
  |   1 |   39·3708 |   3  3·3708 |    3¼           |
  |   2 |   78·7416 |   6  6·7416 |    6½           |
  |   3 |  118·1124 |   9 10·1124 |   10            |
  |   4 |  157·4832 |  13  1·4832 |   13            |
  |   5 |  196·8540 |  16  4·8540 |   16-1/3        |
  |   6 |  236·2248 |  19  8·2248 |   19-2/3        |
  |   7 |  275·5956 |  22 11·5956 |   23            |
  |   8 |  314·9664 |  26  2·9664 |   26¼           |
  |   9 |  354·3372 |  29  6·3372 |   29½           |
  |  10 |  393·7089 |  32  9·7080 |   33            |
  |  11 |  433·0788 |  36  1·0788 |   36 (12 yds.)  |
  |  12 |  472·4496 |  39  4·4496 |   39-1/3        |
  |  13 |  511·8204 |  42  7·8204 |   42-2/3        |
  |  14 |  551·1912 |  45 11·1912 |   46            |
  |  15 |  590·5620 |  49  2·5620 |   49¼           |
  |  16 |  620·9328 |  52  5·9328 |   52½           |
  |  17 |  669·3036 |  55  9·3036 |   55¾           |
  |  18 |  708·6744 |  59  0·6744 |   59            |
  |  19 |  748·0452 |  62  4·0452 |   62-1/3        |
  |  20 |  787·416  |  65  7·4160 |   65-2/3        |
  |  30 | 1181·124  |  98  5·124  |   98½           |
  |  40 | 1574·832  | 131  2·832  |  131¼           |
  |  50 | 1968·54   | 164  0·54   |  164            |
  | 100 | 3937·08   | 328  1·08   |  328 (109 yds.) |
  +-----+-----------+-------------+-----------------+

N.B.--The following is a convenient approximate Rule:--“To turn _Meters_
into _Yards_, add 1-11th to the number of Meters.”




WORK AT HISSARLIK IN 1871.




CHAPTER I.

     The site of ILIUM described--Excavations in 1870: the City Wall of
     Lysimachus--Purchase of the site and grant of a _firman_--Arrival
     of Dr. and Madame Schliemann in 1871, and beginning of the
     Excavations--The Hill of HISSARLIK, the _Acropolis_ of the Greek
     Ilium--Search for its limits--Difficulties of the work--The great
     cutting on the North side--Greek coins found--Dangers from fever.


On the Hill of Hissarlik, in the Plain of Troy,
October 18th, 1871.

In my work ‘Ithaca, the Peloponnesus, and Troy,’ published in 1869, I
endeavoured to prove, both by the result of my own excavations and by
the statements of the Iliad, that the Homeric Troy cannot possibly have
been situated on the heights of Bunarbashi, to which place most
archæologists assign it. At the same time I endeavoured to explain that
the site of Troy must necessarily be identical with the site of that
town which, throughout all antiquity and down to its complete
destruction at the end of the eighth or the beginning of the ninth
century A.D.,[74] was called Ilium, and not until 1000 years after its
disappearance--that is 1788 A.D.--was christened Ilium Novum by
Lechevalier,[75] who, as his work proves, can never have visited his
_Ilium Novum_; for in his map he places it on the other side of the
Scamander, close to _Kum-kaleh_, and therefore 4 miles from its true
position.

The site of Ilium is upon a plateau lying on an average about 80 feet
above the Plain, and descending very abruptly on the north side. Its
north-western corner is formed by a hill about 26 feet higher still,
which is about 705 feet in breadth and 984 in length,[76] and from its
imposing situation and natural fortifications this hill of _Hissarlik_
seems specially suited to be the Acropolis of the town.[77] Ever since
my first visit, I never doubted that I should find the Pergamus of Priam
in the depths of this hill. In an excavation which I made on its
north-western corner in April 1870,[78] I found among other things, at a
depth of 16 feet, walls about 6½ feet thick, which, as has now been
proved, belong to a bastion of the time of Lysimachus. Unfortunately I
could not continue those excavations at the time, because the
proprietors of the field, two Turks in Kum-Kaleh, who had their
sheepfolds on the site, would only grant me permission to dig further on
condition that I would at once pay them 12,000 piasters for damages,[79]
and in addition they wished to bind me, after the conclusion of my
excavations, to put the field in order again. As this did not suit my
convenience, and the two proprietors would not sell me the field at any
price, I applied to his Excellency Safvet Pacha, the Minister of Public
Instruction, who at my request, and in the interest of science, managed
that Achmed Pacha, the Governor of the Dardanelles and the Archipelago,
should receive orders from the Ministry of the Interior to have the
field valued by competent persons, and to force the proprietors to sell
it to the Government at the price at which it had been valued: it was
thus obtained for 3000 piasters.

In trying to obtain the necessary firman for continuing my excavations,
I met with new and great difficulties, for the Turkish Government are
collecting ancient works of art for their recently established Museum in
Constantinople, in consequence of which the Sultan no longer grants
permission for making excavations. But what I could not obtain in spite
of three journeys to Constantinople, I got at last through the
intercession of my valued friend, the temporary _chargé d’affaires_ of
the United States to the Sublime Porte--Mr. John P. Brown, the author of
the excellent work ‘Ancient and Modern Constantinople’ (London, 1868).

So on the 27th of September I arrived at the Dardanelles with my firman.
But here again I met with difficulties, this time on the part of the
before named Achmed Pacha, who imagined that the position of the field
which I was to excavate was not accurately enough indicated in the
document, and therefore would not give me his permission for the
excavations until he should receive a more definite explanation from the
Grand Vizier. Owing to the change of ministry which had occurred, a long
time would no doubt have elapsed before the matter was settled, had it
not occurred to Mr. Brown to apply to his Excellency Kiamil-Pacha, the
new Minister of Public Instruction, who takes a lively interest in
science, and at whose intercession the Grand Vizier immediately gave
Achmed Pacha the desired explanation. This, however, again occupied 13
days, and it was only on the evening of the 10th of October that I
started with my wife from the Dardanelles for the Plain of Troy, a
journey of eight hours. As, according to the firman, I was to be watched
by a Turkish official, whose salary I have to pay during the time of my
excavations, Achmed Pacha assigned to me the second secretary of his
chancellary of justice, an Armenian, by name Georgios Sarkis, whom I pay
23 piasters daily.

At last, on Wednesday, the 11th of this month, I again commenced my
excavations with 8 workmen, but on the following morning I was enabled
to increase their number to 35, and on the 13th to 74, each of whom
receives 9 piasters daily (1 franc 80 centimes). As, unfortunately, I
only brought 8 wheelbarrows from France, and they cannot be obtained
here, and cannot even be made in all the country round, I have to use 52
baskets for carrying away the rubbish. This work, however, proceeds but
slowly and is very tiring, as the rubbish has to be carried a long way
off. I therefore employ also four carts drawn by oxen, each of which
again costs me 20 piasters a day. I work with great energy and spare no
cost, in order, if possible, to reach the native soil before the winter
rains set in, which may happen at any moment. Thus I hope finally to
solve the great problem as to whether the hill of Hissarlik is--as I
firmly believe--the citadel of Troy.

As it is an established fact that hills which consist of pure earth and
are brought under the plough gradually disappear--that for instance, the
Wartsberg, near the village of Ackershagen in Mecklenburg, which I once,
as a child, considered to be the highest mountain in the world, has
quite vanished in 40 years--so it is equally a fact, that hills on
which, in the course of thousands of years, new buildings have been
continually erected upon the ruins of former buildings, gain very
considerably in circumference and height. The hill of Hissarlik
furnishes the most striking proof of this. As already mentioned, it lies
at the north-western end of the site of Ilium, which is distinctly
indicated by the surrounding walls built by Lysimachus. In addition to
the imposing situation of this hill within the circuit of the town, its
present Turkish name of _Hissarlik_, “fortress” or “acropolis"--from
the word حِصَاْر root حَصَرَ, to enclose, which has passed from the
Arabic into the Turkish--seems also to prove that this is the Pergamus
of Ilium; that here Xerxes (in 480 B.C.) offered up 1000 oxen to the
Ilian Athena;[80] that here Alexander the Great hung up his armour in
the temple of the goddess, and took away in its stead some of the
weapons dedicated therein belonging to the time of the Trojan war, and
likewise sacrificed to the Ilian Athena.[81] I conjectured that this
temple, the pride of the Ilians, must have stood on the highest point of
the hill, and I therefore decided to excavate this locality down to the
native soil. But in order, at the same time, to bring to light the most
ancient of the fortifying walls of the Pergamus, and to decide
accurately how much the hill had increased in breadth by the _débris_
which had been thrown down since the erection of those walls, I made an
immense cutting on the face of the steep northern slope, about 66 feet
from my last year’s work.[82] This cutting was made in a direction due
south, and extended across the highest plateau, and was so broad that it
embraced the whole building, the foundations of which, consisting of
large hewn stones, I had already laid open last year to a depth of from
only 1 to 3 feet below the surface. According to an exact measurement,
this building, which appears to belong to the first century after
Christ, is about 59 feet in length, and 43 feet in breadth. I have of
course had all these foundations removed as, being within my excavation,
they were of no use and would only have been in the way.

The difficulty of making excavations in a wilderness like this, where
everything is wanting, are immense and they increase day by day; for, on
account of the steep slope of the hill, the cutting becomes longer the
deeper I dig, and so the difficulty of removing the rubbish is always
increasing. This, moreover, cannot be thrown directly down the slope,
for it would of course only have to be carried away again; so it has to
be thrown down on the steep side of the hill at some distance to the
right and left of the mouth of the cutting. The numbers of immense
blocks of stone also, which we continually come upon, cause great
trouble and have to be got out and removed, which takes up a great deal
of time, for at the moment when a large block of this kind is rolled to
the edge of the slope, all of my workmen leave their own work and hurry
off to see the enormous weight roll down its steep path with a
thundering noise and settle itself at some distance in the Plain. It is,
moreover, an absolute impossibility for me, who am the only one to
preside over all, to give each workman his right occupation, and to
watch that each does his duty. Then, for the purpose of carrying away
the rubbish, the side passages have to be kept in order, which likewise
runs away with a great deal of time, for their inclinations have to be
considerably modified at each step that we go further down.

Notwithstanding all these difficulties the work advances rapidly, and if
I could only work on uninterruptedly for a month, I should certainly
reach a depth of more than 32 feet, in spite of the immense breadth of
the cutting.

The medals hitherto discovered are all of copper, and belong for the
most part to Alexandria Troas; some also are of Ilium, and of the first
centuries before and after Christ.

My dear wife, an Athenian lady, who is an enthusiastic admirer of Homer,
and knows almost the whole of the ‘Iliad’ by heart, is present at the
excavations from morning to night. I will not say anything about our
mode of life in this solitude, where everything is wanting, and where we
have to take four grains of quinine every morning as a precaution
against the pestilential malaria. All of my workmen are Greeks, from the
neighbouring village of Renkoï; only on Sunday, a day on which the
Greeks do not work, I employ Turks. My servant, Nikolaos Zaphyros, from
Renkoï, whom I pay 30 piasters a day, is invaluable to me in paying the
daily wages of the workmen, for he knows every one of them, and is
honest. Unfortunately, however, he gives me no assistance in the works,
as he neither possesses the gift of commanding, nor has he the slightest
knowledge of what I am seeking.

I naturally have no leisure here, and I have only been able to write the
above because it is raining heavily, and therefore no work can be done.
On the next rainy day I shall report further on the progress of my
excavations.

[Illustration: No. 36. A large Trojan Amphora of Terra-cotta (8 M.).]




CHAPTER II.

     Number of workmen--Discoveries at 2 to 4 meters deep--Greek
     coins--Remarkable terra-cottas with small stamps, probably _Ex
     votos_--These cease, and are succeeded by the whorls--Bones of
     sharks, shells of mussels and oysters, and pottery--Three Greek
     Inscriptions--The splendid panoramic view from Hissarlik--The Plain
     of Troy and the heroic _tumuli_--Thymbria: Mr. Frank Calvert’s
     Museum--The mound of Chanaï Tépé--The Scamander and its ancient
     bed--Valley of the Simoïs, and ruins of Ophrynium.

On the Hill of Hissarlik, October 26th, 1871.

[Illustration: Nos. 37-39. Stamped Terra-cottas (1½--2 M.).]

[Illustration: No. 40. Stamped Terra-cotta (2 M.).]


Since my report of the 18th I have continued the excavations with the
utmost energy, with, on an average, 80 workmen, and I have to-day
reached an average depth of 4 meters (13 feet). At a depth of 6½ feet
I discovered a well, covered with a very large stone, and filled with
rubbish. Its depth I have not been able to ascertain; it belongs to the
Roman period, as is proved by the cement with which the stones are
joined together. Ruins of buildings, consisting of hewn stones joined or
not joined by cement, I only find at about a depth of 2 meters (6½
feet). In the layers of _débris_ between 2 and 4 meters deep (6½ to
13 feet), I find scarcely any stones, and to my delight the huge blocks
of stone no longer occur at all. Medals belonging to Ilium and to the
first and second centuries before Christ, and the first two centuries
after Christ, as well as coins of Alexandria Troas and Sigeum, the age
of which I do not know, were found almost immediately below the surface,
and only in some few cases as deep as 1 meter (3¼ feet). By far the
greater number of the Ilian coins bear the image of Minerva, of Faustina
the elder, of Marcus Aurelius, of Faustina the younger, of Commodus or
of Crispina, and I found one with the following inscription: ΦΑΥΣΤΙΝΑ
϶ΚΤΩΡ ΙΛΙΕΩΝ. As far down as 2 meters (6½ feet) I found, as during my
last year’s excavations in this hill, an immense number of round
articles of terra-cotta, red, yellow, grey and black, with two holes,
without inscriptions, but frequently with a kind of potter’s stamp upon
them. I cannot find in the holes of any one of these articles the
slightest trace of wear by their having been used for domestic purposes,
and therefore I presume that they have served as _Ex votos_ for hanging
up in the temples. Upon most of those bearing a stamp I perceive in it
an altar, and above the latter a bee or fly with outspread wings; upon
others there is a bull, a swan, a child, or two horses. Curiously enough
these articles vanish all at once at a depth of a 2 meters (6½ feet),
and from this depth downwards I find, in their stead, pieces that are
sometimes as round as a ball, exactly the shape of a German humming-top,
sometimes in the form of hemispheres, others again in the form of cones,
tops (_carrouselen_), or volcanoes. They are from ¾ of an inch to
2¼ inches high and broad, and all the different forms have a hole
right through the centre; almost all of them have on one side the most
various kinds of decorations encircling the central hole.[83] With the
exception of a few of these objects made of blue stone, from ¾ of an
inch to 1½ inch broad, and found at a depth of 3 meters (10 feet),
they are all made of terra-cotta, and it is quite evident that the
decorations were engraved when the clay was still in a soft state. All
are of such excellent clay, and burnt so hard, that I at first believed
them to be of stone, and only perceived my mistake after having
carefully examined them. In the depth we have now arrived at I also find
very many of those elegant round vertebræ which form the backbone of the
shark, and of which walking-sticks are often made. The existence of
these vertebræ seems to prove that in remote antiquity this sea
contained sharks, which are now no longer met with here. To-day I also
found upon a fragment of rough pottery the representation of a man’s
head with large protruding eyes, a long nose, and a very small mouth,
which seems clearly to be of Phœnician workmanship.

I also constantly come upon immense quantities of mussel-shells, and it
seems as if the old inhabitants of Ilium had been very fond of this
shell-fish. Oyster-shells are also found, but only seldom; on the other
hand, I find very many fragments of pottery. As far as the depth yet
reached, all the buildings which have stood upon this hill in the course
of thousands of years seem to have been destroyed by fire; every one of
them is distinctly indicated by a layer of calcined ruins. This is at
all events the reason why I do not also find other objects, and
especially why I no longer find earthen vessels. Those I have hitherto
found uninjured are very small pots of coarse workmanship; however, the
fragments of the pottery prove that even in the time to which the ruins
belong, at a depth of 4 meters (13 feet), there already existed good
kitchen utensils.

In the quadrangular building already mentioned I found, at a depth of
about 5 feet, a slab of marble 25·6 inches in length, the upper part of
which is 13·6 inches in breadth, and the lower part 15·36 inches. It
contains the following inscription:--

     Ἐπειδὴ Διαφένης Πολλέως Τημνίτης, διατρίβων παρὰ τῷ βασιλεῖ, φίλος
     ὢν καὶ εὔνους διατελεῖ τῷ δήμῳ, χρείας παρεχόμενος προθύμως εἰς ἃ
     ἄν τις αὐτὸν παρακαλῇ, δεδόχθαι τῇ βουλῇ καὶ τῷ δήμῳ ἐπαινέσαι μὲν
     αὐτὸν ἐπὶ τούτοις, παρακαλεῖν δὲ καὶ εἰς τὸ λοιπὸν εἶναι φιλότιμον
     εἰς τὰ τοῦ δήμου συμφέροντα, δεδόσθαι δὲ αὐτῷ πολιτείαν, προξενίαν,
     ἔγκτησιν, ἀτέλειαν ὧν καὶ οἱ πολῖται ἀτελεῖς εἰσι καὶ ἔφοδον ἐπὶ
     τὴν βουλὴν πρώτῳ μετὰ τὰ ἱερὰ καὶ ἄφιξιν καὶ ἐμ πολέμῳ καὶ ἐν
     εἰρήνῃ ἀσυλεὶ καὶ ἀσπονδεί· ἀναγράψαι δὲ τὰ δεδομένα αὐτῷ ταῦτα εἰς
     στήλην καὶ (ἀνα)θεῖναι ε(ἰς....

The king spoken of in this inscription must have been one of the kings
of Pergamus, and from the character of the writing I believe that it
must be assigned to the third century before Christ.

At about the same depth, and by the side of the building, I found a
second marble slab 16·5 inches in length and 13·4 inches in breadth. The
inscription runs as follows:--

     Ἰλιεῖς ἔδοσαν Μενελάῳ Ἀῤῥαβαίου Ἀθηναίῳ εὐεργέτῃ γενομένῳ αὐτῶν καὶ
     περὶ τὴν ἐλευθερίαν ἀνδρὶ ἀγαθῷ γενομένῳ προξενίαν καὶ εὐεργεσίαν.

This second inscription, to judge from the form of the letters, appears
to belong to the first century _B.C._ “Ἀῤῥαβαῖος” here occurs for the
first time as an Attic name.

At the same depth, and likewise by the side of the foundations of the
same building, I found a third marble slab, nearly 15 inches long and
about 14 broad. Its inscription is:--

     Μηνόφιλος Γλαυρίου εἶπεν· ἐπειδὴ πλείονες τῶν πολιτῶν ἐπελθόντες
     ἐπὶ τὴν βουλήν φασιν Χαιρέαν τὸν τεταγμένον ἐπ’ Ἀβύδου εὔνουν τε
     εἶναι τῇ πόλει καὶ ἐνίοις πρεσβευομένοις ὑπὸ τοῦ δήμου πρὸς αὐτὸν
     βουλόμενον τῇ πόλει χαρίζεσθαι τὴν πᾶσαν σπουδὴν καὶ πρόνοιαν
     ποεῖσθαι καὶ τοῖς συναντῶσιν αὐτῷ τῶν πολιτῶν φιλανθρώπως
     προσφέρεσθαι, ἵνα οὖν καὶ ὁ δῆμος φαίνηται τὴν καθήκουσαν χάριν
     ἀποδιδοὺς τοῖς προσαιρουμένοις τὴν πό(λιν)....... δεδόχθαι.

This third inscription also appears to belong to the first century B.C.

It is probable that the building in and around which I discovered these
three inscriptions was the Town-hall of Ilium; at all events, it does
not appear to have been a temple.

The view from the hill of Hissarlik is extremely magnificent.[84] Before
me lies the glorious Plain of Troy, which, since the recent rain, is
again covered with grass and yellow buttercups; on the north-north-west,
at about an hour’s distance, it is bounded by the Hellespont. The
peninsula of Gallipoli here runs out to a point, upon which stands a
lighthouse. To the left of it is the island of Imbros, above which rises
Mount Ida of the island of Samothrace, at present covered with snow; a
little more to the west, on the Macedonian peninsula, lies the
celebrated Mount Athos, or Monte Santo, with its monasteries, at the
north-western side of which there are still to be seen traces of that
great canal which, according to Herodotus (VII. 22-23), was made by
Xerxes, in order to avoid sailing round the stormy Cape Athos.

Returning to the Plain of Troy, we see to the right of it, upon a spur
of the promontory of Rhœteum, the sepulchral mound of Ajax; at the foot
of the opposite Cape of Sigeum that of Patroclus, and upon a spur of the
same cape the sepulchre of Achilles; to the left of the latter, on the
promontory itself, is the village of Yenishehr. The Plain, which is
about two hours’ journey in breadth, is thence bounded on the west by
the shores of the Ægean, which are, on an average, about 131 feet high,
and upon which we see first the sepulchral mound of Festus, the
confidential friend of Caracalla, whom the Emperor (according to
Herodian, IV.) caused to be poisoned on his visit to Ilium, that he
might be able to imitate the funeral rites which Achilles celebrated in
honour of his friend Patroclus, as described by Homer (_Iliad_, XXIII.).
Then upon the same coast there is another sepulchral mound, called
_Udjek-Tépé_, rather more than 78½ feet in height, which most
archæologists consider to be that of the old man Æsyetes, from which
Polites, trusting to the swiftness of his feet, watched to see when the
Greek army would set forth from the ships.[85] The distance of this
mound from the Greek camp on the Hellespont is, however, fully 3½
hours, whereas at a distance of a quarter of an hour a man cannot be
seen. Polites, moreover, would not have required to have been very
swift-footed to have escaped at a distance of 3½ hours. In short,
from the passage in the Iliad this tomb cannot possibly be identified
with that of Æsyetes, whether the site of ancient Troy be assigned to
the heights of Bunarbashi or to Ilium, where I am digging. Between the
last-named mounds we see projecting above the high shores of the Ægean
Sea the island of Tenedos. To the south, we see the Plain of Troy,
extending again to a distance of two hours, as far as the heights of
Bunarbashi, above which rises majestically the snow-capped Gargarus of
Mount Ida, from which Jupiter witnessed the battles between the Trojans
and the Greeks.[86] At half-an-hour’s distance to the left of Bunarbashi
is the beautiful estate of 5000 acres, whose name of Batak is now
changed into Thymbria, belonging to my friend Mr. Frederick Calvert. It
deserves the change of name for more than one reason; for not only does
the river Thymbrius (now Kemer) flow through it, but it comprises the
whole site of the ancient town of Thymbria, with its temple of Apollo,
among the ruins of which the proprietor’s brother, Mr. Frank
Calvert--known for his archæological investigations--is making
excavations, and has found several valuable inscriptions; among others,
an inventory of the temple. This estate further comprises the site of an
ancient town, which is apparently encompassed in some places by
ramparts; it is covered with fragments of pottery, and in regard to
position, distance, &c., corresponds so closely with the statements of
Strabo that it must certainly be his “Ἰλιέων κώμη,” where, agreeing with
the theory of Demetrius of Scepsis, he places the Homeric Troy. At the
foot of the hill containing the site, there are, curiously enough, two
springs, one of hot the other of cold water.[87] These springs--probably
owing to their natural channels having been stopped up for centuries by
a fallen bridge--have formed a large marsh of 240 acres, the
evaporations of which greatly contribute to the malaria of the glorious
Plain. The marvellous circumstance that these springs are situated
directly before the site of “Ἰλιέων κώμη” and that their position
corresponds so exactly with the two springs of hot and cold water which
existed in front of ancient Troy, and in which the Trojan women used to
wash their clothes, convinces Mr. Frederick Calvert that Demetrius of
Scepsis and Strabo were right, and that he possesses the actual site of
ancient Troy. In order to gain 240 acres of rich land and to make the
district more healthy, but especially also in the interest of science,
Mr. Calvert has now caused the channels to be opened, and he believes,
as the incline is considerable, amounting at least to 53 feet, and the
distance from the Hellespont is three hours, that by next summer the
whole marsh will be dried up, and the two springs, which are now 5 feet
under water, will be brought to light.[88] I have in vain endeavoured to
make Mr. Calvert change his opinion, by seeking to convince him that,
according to the Iliad (II. 123-30),[89] Troy must at least have had
50,000 inhabitants, whereas the site he possesses is scarcely large
enough for 10,000; further, that the distance from the Ἰλιέων κώμη to
the Hellespont directly contradicts the statements of Homer, for we are
told that the Greek troops in one day twice forced their way fighting
from the camp to the town, and returned twice, fighting. The distance of
the town from the ships, therefore, in my opinion, can at most have been
that of one hour (about 3 miles). Mr. Calvert replies that the whole
Plain of Troy is alluvial land, and that at the time of the Trojan war
its site must have been nearer the Hellespont; but, three years ago, in
my work, ‘Ithaca, the Peloponnesus, and Troy,’ I endeavoured to prove
that the Plain of Troy is decidedly not alluvial land.

[Illustration:

PLATE IV.

ISLAND OF IMBROS.
Mount Ida in Samothrace.
The Ægean Sea.
Kum-Kaleh.
Lighthouse.
PENINSULA OF GALLIPOLI.
Hellespont.
Simois.
To the right of the Camels is the old bed of the Scamander.
Mounds of Achilles and Patroclus.
Yeni-Shehr
  on
Sigeum Pr.

VIEW OF THE NORTHERN PART OF THE PLAIN OF TROY, FROM THE HILL OF
HISSARLIK.]

[Illustration:

PLATE V.

THE CHAIN OF MOUNT IDA.
Mount Gargarus (Kasdak).
Village of Chiplak.
Snow-clad Summit.
Excavations in the Temple.
Altar.

VIEW OF THE SOUTH-EASTERN PART OF THE PLAIN OF TROY, FROM THE HILL OF
HISSARLIK.]

Another curiosity of this estate is, that close to the temple of Apollo
there exists a round hill, called “Chanaï Tépé,” about 32¾ feet in
height, and 216½ feet in diameter at its base. It used to be
considered a natural hill, till Mr. Frank Calvert, in the year 1856,
made a cutting in it, and found upon a flat rock, 16 feet high, a
circular space, enclosed by a wall 6½ feet in height. The whole of
the inner space, as far as the edge of the surrounding wall, was filled
with calcined bones, which the surgeons of the English fleet pronounced
to be human bones. In the centre Mr. Calvert found the skeleton of a
human being. The whole was covered with about 10 feet of earth.

The Plain of Troy is traversed from the south-east to the north-west by
the Scamander, which is distant from Hissarlik 35 minutes’ walk, and the
bed of which I can recognise from here by the uninterrupted row of trees
growing upon its banks. Between the Scamander and Hissarlik, at a
distance of only 15 minutes from the latter, the Plain is again
intersected by the river Kalifatli-Asmak, which rises in the marshes of
Batak (Thymbria), and is filled with running water only in late autumn,
winter, and spring; but during the hot summer months, till the end of
October, it consists of an uninterrupted series of deep pools. This
stream, even during the continual heavy winter rains, and in comparison
with its splendid and immensely broad channel, has but a very scanty
supply of water--in fact, never so much as to cover even the tenth part
of the breadth of its bed. I therefore believe that its huge bed must at
one time have been the bed of the Scamander; I believe this all the
more, as the Simoïs still flows into the Kalifatli-Asmak at a quarter of
an hour’s distance north of Ilium, where I am digging.[90] By
identifying the channel of this river, which may be traced to the
Hellespont near Cape Rhœteum, with the most ancient bed of the
Scamander, we may settle the otherwise insurmountable difficulties of
the Homeric topography of the Plain of Troy; for, had the Scamander
occupied its present bed at the time of the Trojan war, it would have
flowed through the Greek camp, and Homer would have had abundant
opportunity of speaking of this important circumstance. But as he never
mentions a river in the camp, there can, of course, have been none
there. Moreover, the Simoïs is now half-an-hour’s distance from the
Scamander; whereas Homer frequently mentions the confluence of these two
streams before Ilium, and most of the battles took place in the fields
between Troy, the Scamander, and the Simoïs. At its confluence with the
Kalifatli-Asmak, whose enormous bed must, at one time, have belonged to
the Scamander, the Simoïs has an especially large and deep bed, which is
doubtless still the same that this stream occupied at the time of the
Trojan war.

The Kalifatli-Asmak, after its confluence with the Scamander near the
village of Kum-köi, turns to the north-west, and flows into the sea by
three arms, not very far from the present bed of the Scamander; below
the village, however, it has quite a narrow bed, which is obviously of
recent formation. Its old channel, on the other hand, which was the
ancient bed of the Scamander and is of an immense breadth, proceeds
direct northwards from Kum-köi: it is now occupied by the water of the
small rivulet called _In-tépé-Asmak_, which I shall afterwards describe
minutely, and empties itself, as before said, into the Hellespont close
to Cape Rhœteum.

The Scamander did not take possession of its present bed suddenly, but
very gradually, probably in the course of many centuries; for between
its present channel and its ancient one there are three enormous
river-beds, likewise leading to the Hellespont, which possess no water
and must necessarily have been successively formed by the Scamander, as
there is no other river here that could have formed them.

To the north-north-east, I overlook another plain, called Chalil-Owasi,
half an hour in breadth and 1½ hour in length, which is traversed by
the Simoïs and extends to the hill upon which are the mighty ruins of
the ancient city of Ophrynium. The coins which have been found there
leave no doubt about this. There, close to the Simoïs, was Hector’s
(so-called) tomb, and a grove sacred to his memory.[91]

[Illustration: No. 41. A great mixing Vessel (κρατήρ), of Terra-cotta,
with 4 Handles, about 1 ft. 5 in. high, and nearly 1 ft. 9 in. in
diameter (7 M.). (See pp. 157, 262).]




CHAPTER III.

     Puzzling transitions from the “Stone Age” to a higher
     civilization--The stone age reappears in force, mixed with pottery
     of fine workmanship, and the whorls in great number--Conjectures as
     to their uses: probably _Ex votos_--_Priapi_ of stone and
     terra-cotta: their worship brought by the primitive Aryans from
     Bactria--Vessels with the owl’s face--Boars’ tusks--Varied
     implements and weapons of stone--Hand mill-stones--Models of canoes
     in terra-cotta--Whetstones--The one object of the excavations, to
     find TROY.


On the Hill of Hissarlik, November 3rd, 1871.

My last communication was dated the 26th of October, and since then I
have proceeded vigorously with 80 workmen on an average. Unfortunately,
however, I have lost three days; for on Sunday, a day on which the
Greeks do not work, I could not secure the services of any Turkish
workmen, for they are now sowing their crops; on two other days I was
hindered by heavy rains.

To my extreme surprise, on Monday, the 30th of last month, I suddenly
came upon a mass of _débris_, in which I found an immense quantity of
implements made of hard black stone (diorite), but of a very primitive
form. On the following day, however, not a single stone implement was
found, but a small piece of silver wire and a great deal of broken
pottery of elegant workmanship, among others the fragment of a cup with
an owl’s head. I therefore thought I had again come upon the remains of
a civilized people, and that the stone implements of the previous day
were the remains of an invasion of a barbarous tribe, whose dominion had
been of but short duration. But I was mistaken, for on the Wednesday the
stone period reappeared in even greater force, and continued throughout
the whole of yesterday. To-day, unfortunately, no work can be done owing
to the heavy downpour of rain.

I find much in this stone period that is quite inexplicable to me, and I
therefore consider it necessary to describe everything as minutely as
possible, in the hope that one or other of my honoured colleagues will
be able to give an explanation of the points which are obscure to me.

In the first place, I am astonished that here on the highest point of
the hill, where, according to every supposition the noblest buildings
must have stood, I come upon the stone period as early as at a depth of
4½ meters (about 15 feet), whereas last year, at a distance of only
66 feet from the top of the hill, I found in my cutting, at the depth of
more than 16 feet, a wall, 6½ feet thick, and by no means very
ancient, and no trace of the stone period, although I carried that
cutting to a depth of more than 26 feet. This probably can be explained
in no other way than that the hill, at the place where the wall stands,
must have been very low, and that this low position has been gradually
raised by the _débris_.

Further, I do not understand how it is possible that in the present
stratum and upon the whole length of my cutting (which must now be at
least 184 feet) to its mouth, that is, as far as the steep declivity, I
should find stone implements, which obviously prove that that part of
the steep side of the hill cannot have increased in size since the stone
period by rubbish thrown down from above.

Next, I cannot explain how it is possible that I should find things
which, to all appearance, must have been used by the uncivilized men of
the stone period, but which could not have been made with the rude
implements at their disposal. Among these I may specially mention the
earthen vessels found in great numbers, without decorations, it is true,
and not fine, but which however are of excellent workmanship. Not one of
these vessels has been turned upon a potter’s wheel, and yet it appears
to me that they could not have been made without the aid of some kind of
machine, such as, on the other hand, could not have been produced by the
rude stone implements of the period.

I am further surprised to find, in this stone period, and more
frequently than ever before, those round articles with a hole in the
centre, which have sometimes the form of humming-tops or whorls
(_carrouselen_), sometimes of fiery mountains. In the last form they
bear, on a small scale, the most striking resemblance to the colossal
sepulchral mounds of this district, which latter, both on this account
and also because stone implements have been found in one of them (the
Chanaï Tépé) belong probably to the stone period, and therefore perhaps
to an age thousands of years before the Trojan war.[92] At a depth of 3
meters (about 10 feet), I found one of these objects made of very fine
marble: all the rest are made of excellent clay rendered very hard by
burning; almost all of them have decorations, which have evidently been
scratched into them when the clay was as yet unburnt, and which in very
many cases have been filled with a white substance, to make them more
striking to the eye. It is probable that at one time the decorations
upon all of these objects were filled with that white substance, for
upon many of them, where it no longer exists, I see some traces of it.
Upon some of the articles of very hard black clay without decorations,
some hand has endeavoured to make them after the clay had been burnt,
and, when looked at through a magnifying glass, these marks leave no
doubt that they have been laboriously scratched with a piece of flint.

The question then forces itself upon us: _For what were these objects
used?_ They cannot possibly have been employed in spinning or weaving,
or as weights for fishing-nets, for they are too fine and elegant for
such purposes; neither have I as yet been able to discover any
indication that they could have been used for any handicraft. When,
therefore, I consider the perfect likeness of most of these objects to
the form of the heroic sepulchral mounds, I am forced to believe that
they, as well as those with two holes which occurred only at a depth of
6½ feet, were used as _Ex votos_.

Again, to my surprise, I frequently find the Priapus, sometimes
represented quite true to nature in stone or terra-cotta, sometimes in
the form of a pillar rounded off at the top (just such as I have seen in
Indian temples, but there only about 4 inches in length). I once also
found the symbol in the form of a little pillar only about 1 inch in
length, made of splendid black marble striped with white and beautifully
polished, such as is never met with in the whole of this district. I
consequently have not the slightest doubt that the Trojan people of the
stone period worshipped Priapus as a divinity, and that, belonging to
the Indo-Germanic race, they brought this religion from Bactria; for in
India, as is well known, the god of production and of destruction is
represented and worshipped in this form. Moreover, it is probable that
these ancient Trojans are the ancestors of the great Hellenic nation,
for I repeatedly find upon cups and vases of terra-cotta representations
of the owl’s head, which is probably the great-great-grandmother of the
Athenian bird of Pallas-Athena.

With the exception of the above-mentioned piece of silver wire and two
copper nails, I have as yet found no trace of metal in the strata of the
stone period.

As in the upper strata, so in those of the stone period, I find a great
many boars’ tusks, which, in the latter strata, have without exception
been pointed at the end, and have served as implements. It is
inconceivable to me how the men of the stone period, with their
imperfect weapons, were able to kill wild boars. Their lances--like all
their other weapons and instruments--are, it is true, made of very hard
black or green stone, but still they are so blunt that it must have
required a giant’s strength to kill a boar with them. Hammers and axes
are met with of all sizes and in great numbers.[93] I likewise find very
many weights of granite, also a number of hand-mills of lava, which
consist of two pieces about a foot in length, oval on one side and flat
on the other, between which the corn was crushed. Sometimes these
mill-stones are made of granite. Knives are found in very great numbers;
all are of flint, some in the form of knife-blades, others--by far the
greater majority--are jagged on one or on both sides, like saws. Needles
and bodkins made of bone are of frequent occurrence, and sometimes also
small bone spoons. Primitive canoes, such as I frequently saw in Ceylon,
formed out of a hollowed trunk of a tree, are often met with here in
miniature, made of terra-cotta, and I presume that these small vessels
may have served as salt-cellars or pepper-boxes. I likewise find a
number of whetstones about 4 inches in length and nearly as much in
breadth, which are sometimes made of clay, sometimes of green or black
slate; further, a number of round, flat stones a little under and over
two inches in diameter, painted red on one side; also many hundreds of
round terra-cottas of the like size and shape, with a hole in the
centre, and which have evidently been made out of fragments of pottery,
and may have been used on spindles. Flat stone mortars are also met
with.

I also find in my excavations a house-wall of the stone period,
consisting of stones joined by clay, like the buildings which were
discovered on the islands of Therasia and Thera (Santorin) under three
layers of volcanic ashes, forming together a height of 68 feet.

My expectations are extremely modest; I have no hope of finding plastic
works of art. The single object of my excavations from the beginning was
only to find Troy, whose site has been discussed by a hundred scholars
in a hundred books, but which as yet no one has ever sought to bring to
light by excavations. If I should not succeed in this, still I shall be
perfectly contented, if by my labours I succeed only in penetrating to
the deepest darkness of pre-historic times, and enriching archæology by
the discovery of a few interesting features from the most ancient
history of the great Hellenic race. The discovery of the stone period,
instead of discouraging me, has therefore only made me the more desirous
to penetrate to the place which was occupied by the first people that
came here, and I still intend to reach it even if I should have to dig
another 50 feet further down.

_Note._--The “Stone Period” described in this chapter seems to be that
of the _third stratum_ upwards from the rock (4 to 7 meters, or 13 to 23
feet deep); but the description does not make this perfectly
clear.--{ED.}

(9M.) (7M.) (14M.)

[Illustration: Nos. 42-44. Terra-cotta Whorls.

No. 44 Is remarkable for the _depth_ at which it was found.]




CHAPTER IV.

     Another passage from the Stone Age to copper implements mixed with
     stone--The signs of a higher civilization increase with the depth
     reached--All the implements are of better workmanship--Discovery of
     supposed inscriptions--Further discussion of the use of the
     whorls--TROY still to be reached--Fine terra-cotta vessels of
     remarkable forms--Great numbers of stone weights and hand
     millstones--Numerous house-walls--Construction of the great
     cutting--Fever and quinine--Wounds and arnica.


On the Hill of Hissarlik, November 18th, 1871.

[Illustration: No. 45. Copper Implements and Weapons from the Trojan
stratum (8 M.). _a_, Axe of an unusual form; _b_, _c_, Battle-Axes of
the common form; _d_, _e_, _g_, Knives; _f_, a Nail.[95]]

[Illustration: No. 46. A Mould of Mica-schist for casting Copper
Implements (8 M.).]

Since my report of the 3rd of this month I have continued my excavations
with the greatest zeal, and although interrupted sometimes by the rain,
and sometimes by Greek festivals, and also in spite of the continually
increasing difficulty in removing the rubbish, I have now reached an
average depth of 10 meters or about 33 English feet.[94] Much that was
inexplicable to me has now become clear, and I must first of all correct
an error made in my last report, that I had come upon the stone period.
I was deceived by the enormous mass of stone implements of all kinds
which were daily dug up, and by the absence of any trace of metal,
except two copper nails, which I believed to have come in some way from
one of the upper strata into the deeper stratum of the stone period. But
since the 6th of this month there have appeared not only many nails,
but also knives, lances, and battle-axes of copper of such elegant
workmanship that they can have been made only by a civilized people.
Hence I must not only recal my conjecture that I had reached the stone
period, but I cannot even admit that I have reached the bronze period,
for the implements and weapons which I find are too well finished. I
must, moreover, draw attention to the fact, that the deeper I dig, from
7 meters (23 feet) downwards, the greater are the indications of a
higher civilization. At a depth of from 4 to 7 meters (13 to 23 feet)
the stone implements and weapons were of a coarse description; the
knives were of flint, generally in the form of small saws, and rarely in
that of a blade; but there were a very great number of sharp pieces of
silex, which must likewise have served as knives. Since then, however,
the stone implements, such as hammers and axes, are of much better
workmanship; there still occur a quantity of silex knives in the form of
saws, but they are much better made than those of the upper strata, and
at a depth below 23 feet double-edged knife-blades of obsidian, which
are so sharp that they might serve as razors. In these depths, moreover,
as I have already said, we again meet with weapons and quantities of
nails, knives, and implements of copper.

[Illustration: Stone Instruments from the Trojan stratum (8 M.).

Nos. 47, 48, 49, of Green Stone, probably Lance-Heads; No. 50, of
Diorite, use unknown.]

But what above all other circumstances seems to prove that I never
reached the stone period, and that, after digging further down into the
strata of rude races between 13 and 23 feet, I have again come upon the
remains of a more civilized nation, are two inscriptions, one of which,
found at a depth of 7½ meters (about 25 feet), seems to be Phœnician,
but consists of only about five letters, which have been scratched by a
pointed instrument, into that side of a small terra-cotta disc which had
been painted white, the disc being only about 2-1/3 inches in diameter.
The letters, in any case, must have stood out very distinctly in the
white colour, but the greater portion of it has disappeared, and thus
two of the five written characters cannot G 2 easily be distinguished. I
hope, however, that the inscription may nevertheless be deciphered.[96]

The other inscription was found at a depth of 8½ meters (27¾ feet)
upon one of those small round articles of terra-cotta with a hole in the
centre, which, from a depth of 6½ feet downwards, occur in immense
numbers in the form of the humming-top, the carrousel, and the volcano.
I have already expressed my opinion that they may have been used as _Ex
votos_, and I may now suggest whether they might not even have been
idols, and especially whether those in the form of a volcano do not
represent Hephæstus? This thought struck me principally from the great
resemblance between these objects and the colossal sepulchral mounds on
the Plain of Troy, which cover the ashes of the corpses of the heroes,
which were burnt by the fire of Hephæstus. At all events, the
decorations introduced upon all of these objects--which seem to have
been executed with very great care, especially on those made of
immensely hard burnt terra-cotta--and also the white substance with
which these decorations are filled so as to be more striking to the eye,
leave no doubt that they have served important purposes. It was upon one
of these small articles of terra-cotta, in the form of a top, that I
found the second inscription.[97] It is so admirably engraved, that one
is astonished to find such work possible in terra-cotta. As the writing
runs right round the small whorl, and is formed on both sides alike, it
seems to me, in my complete ignorance of the language, impossible to
perceive with which letter it commences, or which is the upper or lower
portion of it.

Upon an ordinary stone I at the same time found the character
[Illustration: left-leaning L]. I should be immensely delighted if any
one were able to read these inscriptions, and thus be in a position to
give an explanation about the use of these remarkable objects, about the
people who made them, and about the epoch in which I found myself at the
depth of from 25 to 28 feet.

When, at the time of writing my last report, I saw stone implements and
weapons brought to light, and none but stone, and was forced to believe
that I had penetrated into the stratum of the people belonging to the
stone period, I really began to fear that the actual object of my
excavations, to find here the Pergamus of Priam, had failed; that I had
already reached a period long anterior to the Trojan war, and that the
colossal sepulchral mounds in the Plain of Troy were perhaps thousands
of years older than the deeds of Achilles. But as I find ever more and
more traces of civilization the deeper I dig, I am now perfectly
convinced that I have not yet penetrated to the period of the Trojan
war, and hence I am more hopeful than ever of finding the site of Troy
by further excavations; for if there ever was a Troy--and my belief in
this is firm--it can only have been here, on the site of Ilium. I think
that my excavations of 1868 on the heights of Bunarbashi have proved the
impossibility of a city or even a village ever having stood there,
except at the extreme end of Balidagh, where Consul Hahn has made
excavations, but where, owing to the small space, which is limited by
precipices, there can only have been a small town of 2000 inhabitants at
most. Upon the site of the Ἰλιέων κώμη, which place was regarded as the
site of ancient Troy by Strabo--who had never visited the Plain of
Troy--in accordance with the theory of Demetrius of Scepsis, which I
discussed in my report of the 26th of last month--I have, since Tuesday
the 21st, employed ten workmen to lay bare a portion of the surrounding
wall which seems to be indicated by a low but long rise of the ground.
I do this, however, simply in the interest of science, and I am far from
fancying that I shall find Troy there.

[Illustration: [No. 51. No. 52.]

Trojan Terra-cottas (8 M.).

No. 51. A Vase-cover. No. 52. A Two-handled Cup.]

[Illustration: No. 53. Small Trojan Vase (9 M.).]

[Illustration: Nos. 54, 55. Trojan Terra-cotta Vases (8 M.).]

I must also add, in regard to the round articles of terra-cotta, that,
after a depth of 7 meters (23 feet), those in the form of the volcano
occur less frequently, and almost all are the shape of the top
(_carrousel_). At this depth also, the idols of Vishnu, in the form of
the Priapus, are no longer met with. But I still very frequently find at
a depth below 23 feet the owl’s head on the earthen vessels, which,
although only of one colour and without any decorations, are elegant in
their simplicity, and become the more elegant and finer the deeper I
dig. I have to draw especial attention to the bright red cups, which are
sometimes found in the form of a bell with a kind of coronet below,[98]
sometimes in the shape of immense champagne-glasses with two large
handles. In neither form can they stand upon the lower end like the cups
of the present day, but only upon the upper part, just as we should be
obliged to set down a bell, if we used it as a drinking-cup. I must next
mention the small pots with three little feet, and the large ones with a
neck bent back, then the large vessels with two handles and two others
in the form of upraised arms; and, lastly, the very large funereal urns,
frequently more than a meter (3¼ feet) in height and breadth, which
are met with in such numbers that they hinder us in our work, but which
have hitherto been so much broken that I have been unable to save even
one of them. It is impossible to cement together the pieces of these
broken urns, as the clay is from an inch and a half to nearly 2 inches
thick.

At a depth below 6 meters (nearly 20 feet) down to the depth of 10
meters (33 feet), we find a great many pieces of clay an inch and a half
thick, from about 4 to 5 inches in height, and from about 3 to 4 inches
in breadth, with a perforated hole, either on the broad upper side or on
the narrow side, and which appear to have been used as weights; we also
frequently meet with cylinders of the same clay, which are from 3-1/3
inches in length to 2½ inches in breadth. The enormous quantities of
stone weights and hand-mills of lava, continually brought to light, give
an idea of the number of the houses, through the ruins of which I daily
penetrate. I have placed great numbers of these mills and other stone
implements in the niches of the walls in my excavations for the
inspection of the admirers of Homer who may visit the Plain of Troy.

At a depth of from 8 to 10 meters (26 to 33 feet), I have found numerous
fragments of a substance, about 2¾ inches broad and 1¾ thick,
which is on the inside as hard as stone and of a resinous colour, and on
the outside it has a brilliant gloss, which has evidently been produced
artificially. It has clearly been poured into a mould when in a liquid
state, for it is channelled on all four sides. Doubtless in the
continuation of my excavations I shall obtain an explanation of how
these pieces (the length of which I do not yet know, as I have hitherto
only met with fragments) were made, and what they were used for.[99]

The numerous house-walls, the ruins of which I have daily to remove,
are, at the depth of from 4 to 7 meters (13 to 23 feet), all built of
ordinary unhewn stones joined with clay; and from 7 to 10 meters (23 to
33 feet) they are made of unburnt bricks, dried only in the sun. The
foundations and the door-cills of these brick houses, however, consist
of large stones, such as we have not met with since 2 meters (6½
feet) below the surface.

Lastly, as regards the inclination of the walls of my great cutting, the
nature of the _débris_ allowed me only in three places, each of about 49
feet in length, to make it at an angle of 85 degrees; in all other
places it is at an angle of 67½ degrees. In order to make this more
clear, I may add that my walls of 33 feet high at an angle of 85 degrees
deviate only about 25½ inches, but those of 67½ degrees deviate
about 8½ feet from the perpendicular.

It would give me much pleasure if, in my next communication, I could
report some very interesting discovery.

_November 21st._--The heavy rainfall of yesterday and the day before,
which continued till this morning, rendered it impossible to dispatch
this report before the evening; for I am here living in a wilderness at
eight hours’ distance from the nearest post-office, that is, from the
Dardanelles. I hope that the ground will have become sufficiently dry by
to-morrow morning for me to proceed with my work. I intend, at all
events, to continue the excavations till the appearance of winter, and
then to begin again in April.

The constant warm damp weather produces a very malignant fever, and my
services as a doctor are daily sought. Fortunately, I have a large stock
of quinine by me, and can thus help everyone. But as I do not understand
anything about medicine I should, no doubt, make great mistakes.
Fortunately, however, I remember that once when I was at the point of
death with a fever contracted in the marshes of Nicaragua, the excellent
German physician, Tellkampf of New York, saved my life by a dose of 64
grains of quinine. Hence I give a similar quantity here, but only _in
one dose_ when the case is a very bad one; the quantity I generally give
is four doses of 16 grains. I am also daily called upon not only to cure
wounded men, but camels, donkeys, and horses. I have hitherto been
successful in all cases by using tincture of arnica. I have also, thus
far, cured all the fever patients who have applied for my help. Not one
of them, however, has ever come to thank me; indeed, gratitude does not
appear to be one of the virtues of the present Trojans.




CHAPTER V.

     Interruptions from Rain--Last works of the season, 1871--The
     supposed ruins of Troy reached--Great blocks of stone--Engineering
     contrivances--Excavations at the “Village of the Ilians:” no traces
     of habitation, and none of hot springs--Results of the excavations
     thus far--Review of the objects found at various depths--Structure
     of the lowest houses yet reached--Difficulties of the
     excavations--The object aimed at--Growth of the Hill of Hissarlik.


On the Hill of Hissarlik, November 24th, 1871.

Since my last report, of the 18th and 21st instant, I have had three
days’ work in spite of the continual wet weather; but unfortunately I
find myself now compelled to cease the excavations for the winter,
intending to begin again on the 1st of April, 1872. It is not likely
that winter will set in before the middle of December, and I should
gladly have continued my work till then, in spite of the rain,
especially as I now most firmly believe that I am already among the
ruins of Troy. Since the day before yesterday, I find on the whole
extent of my excavations scarcely anything but large stones--sometimes
hewn, sometimes unhewn--and some of them are enormous blocks. This
morning, for instance, I worked for three hours with 65 workmen in
removing a single threshold by means of ropes and rollers.

I have been obliged to abandon the two large side-passages, when already
at a depth of 23 feet, and I have since caused all the rubbish and small
stones to be brought in baskets and wheel-barrows through the large
exit-channel, and thrown down at its end upon the sides of the steep
declivity. This channel--the walls of which have a slope of 67½
degrees--is now, at the present depth of 33 feet, no longer wide enough
for carrying away such enormous blocks of stone, and it must first of
all be made at least 13 feet wider. This is, however, a gigantic piece
of work, which, owing to the daily rain, I dare not venture to begin
with winter close upon me.

On account of the many huge stones, no terra-cottas were found either
yesterday or on the preceding day. To day, however, during the last
hour’s work, I found a small pot, only about 2 inches high, with three
feet; the whole of the upper portion is in the form of a globe, and is
divided into five large and five small fields, changing alternately in
regular succession. All of the large fields are filled with imprinted
little stars. The mouth or opening is only about 1/3 of an inch in
diameter. I presume that this small and wonderful Trojan vessel was used
by ladies for holding scented oil, which we know was applied after the
bath. It cannot have been used as a lamp, for Homer, who lived 200 years
after the destruction of Troy, does not as yet know of lamps. I also
found this morning two copper arrow-heads, and one of those small
terra-cotta “volcanoes,” which for some days have been less frequently
met with. Further, a small leaden plate, nearly an inch and a half in
length as well as in breadth, with the character [Illustration:
cane-like] in the centre and a hole in one corner, which leaves no doubt
that the small piece used to be hung up.

Although the word γράφειν only occurs twice in Homer, and both times
only signifies “to scratch into,” yet I am firmly convinced that an
alphabetical language was known in ancient Troy, and I cherish the hope
of being able next spring to discover inscriptions and other monuments,
which will leave no doubt, that, since yesterday, at the depth of 33
feet,[100] I have begun to uncover the ruins of the city of Troy, so
long looked for theoretically and now at last practically. All the
objects that I find, I shall, of course, describe in the most faithful
and careful manner.

My excavations at the village of the Ilians (Ἰλιέων κώμη), as was to be
expected, have decidedly turned out unfavourable for Strabo and
Demetrius of Scepsis; for the steep continuous elevation contains no
trace of walls, and consists of coarse sand without the slightest
admixture of _débris_. Neither do I believe, contrary to the assertion
of the proprietor of Thymbria, my worthy friend Mr. Frederick Calvert,
in the existence of a hot spring at the foot of the hill of the Ἰλιέων
κώμη, for I have now searched the whole marsh, with a thermometer in my
hand, and I nowhere find, either in the stagnant or the running water,
the faintest difference in temperature. Of cold springs there are
certainly more than one, but it will be impossible to state how many
till the marsh has been thoroughly drained; it consists at present of
floating islands.

Now when I collect the result of my excavations:--I found close to the
surface only, and in rare cases as far as a depth of 1 meter (3¼
feet), copper medals of Sigeum, Alexandria Troas, and Ilium--the latter
belonging to the first centuries before and after Christ; then small
solid round articles of terra-cotta, like lamps, with two holes, which
occur in great numbers, as far as a depth of 2 meters (6½ feet).
These, however, have no ornaments except the potter’s stamp, in which
there is sometimes an altar with a bee or fly above it, sometimes a
child with its hands stretched forth, sometimes two horses, sometimes a
bull or a swan. Below this depth they cease all at once.[101] In place
of them I found, at depths of from 2 to 10 meters (6½ to 33 feet),
the often described terra-cottas in the form of small volcanoes,
humming-tops or whorls, which, at a depth of 3 meters only (nearly 10
feet), were frequently met with in blue stone, but were in all other
cases of terra-cotta, and almost all of them with decorations. At 6½
feet below the surface I found a Roman well, which I dug out to a depth
of more than 36 feet, but which seems to be sunk down as far as the
Plain. At all depths we met with many mussel-shells, boars’ tusks, and
fish-bones; but the bones of sharks only at the depth of from 11 to 13
feet below the surface. The ruins of houses built of hewn stone, joined
with cement or lime, seldom extend lower than 3¼ feet, and the ruins
of buildings built of large hewn stones not joined by any kind of
cement, never below 6½ feet: visitors to the Plain of Troy can
convince themselves of this with their own eyes, by looking at the walls
of my cuttings. From a depth of 3 to 4 meters (6½ to 13 feet)
downwards, we met with few or no stones; and the calcined ruins of
innumerable layers of _débris_ seem to prove that all of the buildings
which existed there during the course of centuries were built of wood,
and were destroyed by fire. Consequently in these depths I have hitherto
only found fragments of good earthenware; the only things brought out in
an uninjured condition were small pots of the coarsest description.

[Illustration: No. 56. No. 57.

No. 58. No. 59. No. 60. No. 61.

Stone Implements of the earliest Settlers (11 and 14 M.).

Nos. 56 and 57. An Axe and Hammer of Diorite. Nos. 58, 59, 60. Knives of
White Silex.

No. 61. Probably an Arrow-head.]

[Illustration: No. 62. Small Trojan Vase of Terra-cotta, with
Decorations (8 M.).]

[Illustration: No. 63. A Trojan Vase-cover of red Terra-cotta (7 M.).]

At a depth of 4 meters (13 feet), I found a fragment of pottery with a
drawing of a bust, of Phœnician workmanship. Directly upon it were an
immense quantity of stone implements and weapons of hard black stone,
which continued to a depth of 7 meters (23 feet). Simultaneously with
these, but extending to a depth of 10 meters (33 feet), I found elegant
pottery of one colour and without any kind of ornament beyond the owl’s
face; small pots and vases of a larger size with three little feet;
then, but only as far as a depth of 23 feet, the Priapus of terra-cotta
in its natural form, and also in the form of a pillar rounded off at the
top. From 4 to 7 meters (13 to 23 feet) deep, there were a great many
flint knives, the majority of which have the shape of saws, or consist
only of sharp pieces, rarely in the form of blades; needles and little
spoons made of bone, as well as an enormous number of terra-cotta discs
with a hole through the centre; and two copper nails. As is proved by
the numerous house-walls which I have cut through in these depths, many
of which are in the earth-wall of my excavations, the houses were built
of small stones joined with earth. From 7 to 10 meters (23 to 33 feet),
I found a great many copper nails, frequently 5 inches in length, and a
few lances and battle-axes of elegant workmanship. At every foot of
earth that we dig down, after a depth of 23 feet, we find the traces of
a much higher civilization; stone weapons are still occasionally met
with, but they are of splendid workmanship. I found many copper knives,
but also immense numbers of flint knives, which, however, are
incomparably better made than those of the preceding strata. We also
found, although not often, very sharp double-edged knife-blades of
obsidian, 2¾ inches in length. The pots and vases continue to be more
elegant; there were also bright red vase-covers in the form of a bell
with a coronet above, or like gigantic champagne glasses with two large
handles; very many elegant vessels with or without three little feet,
but with little rings on the sides and holes in the mouth in the same
direction, so that they could not only stand, but also be carried on a
cord; likewise a number of very small vases with three little feet. All
the terra-cottas are of a brilliant red, yellow, green, or black colour;
only the very large urns are colourless. From 2 to 10 meters deep
(6½-33 feet) we note the complete absence of painting. At a depth of
7½ meters (24¾ feet) was a small terra-cotta disc with five
letters, which I consider to be Phœnician; at 28 feet one of those
frequently mentioned terra-cottas in the form of a top with six written
characters. At the same depth, upon a stone, one letter, which to all
appearance belongs to a different language; and lastly, at a depth of 10
meters, or 33 English feet, a leaden plate with one letter.

Now as regards the construction of the houses belonging to the strata at
a depth of from 7 to 10 meters (23 to 33 feet), only the foundations and
thresholds were composed of large stones--as anyone may convince himself
by a glance at the earthen walls of my excavations. The house-walls, on
the other hand, were composed of unburnt sun-dried bricks. At a depth of
10 meters (33 feet), I again found the buildings to be of stone, but of
colossal proportions. Most of the stones are very large, many of them
hewn, and we meet with a great many massive blocks. It appears to me
that I have already brought to light several walls at this depth; but I
have unfortunately not yet succeeded in arriving at an opinion as to how
they were actually built and what their thickness was. The stones of the
walls seem to me to have been separated from one another by a violent
earthquake. I have hitherto seen no trace of any kind of cement between
them, either of clay or lime.

Of the terrible difficulties of the excavations, where such large pieces
of stone are met with, only those can have any idea who have been
present at the work and have seen how much time and trouble it takes,
especially during the present rainy weather--first to get out the small
stones round one of the many immense blocks, then to dig out the block
itself, to get the lever under it, to heave it up and roll it through
the mud of the channel to the steep declivity.

But these difficulties only increase my desire, after so many
disappointments, to reach the great goal which is at last lying before
me, to prove that the Iliad is founded on facts, and that the great
Greek nation must not be deprived of this crown of her glory. I shall
spare no trouble and shun no expense to attain this result.

I must still draw attention to the remarkable growth of this hill. The
huge square stones of the foundations of the house on the summit of the
hill (where I found the inscription which appears to belong to the third
century B.C.), which in its day must have been on the surface, are now
in some places only 13 inches, in others only 3¼ feet below the
earth. But as the colossal ruins, which I positively maintain to be
those of ancient Troy, lie at a depth of 33 feet, the accumulation of
_débris_ on this part must have amounted to more than 30 feet during the
first 1000 years, and only from 1 to 3 feet during the last 2000 years.

But, strange to say, on the north side of the hill, with its steep
declivity, at the place where I am digging, the thickness of the hill
has not increased in the slightest degree. For not only do the ruins of
the innumerable habitations in all cases extend to the extreme edge of
the declivity, but I also find up to this point the same objects that I
find on the same horizontal line as far as the opposite end of my
excavations. Hence it is interesting to know that the declivity of the
hill on the north side was exactly as steep at the time of the Trojan
war as it is now, namely, that even at that time it rose at an angle of
40 degrees.

[Illustration: No. 64. A stone Implement of unknown use. Weight 472
grammes. (2 M.)]

[Illustration: No. 65. A strange Vessel of Terra-cotta (15 M.).]




WORK AT HISSARLIK IN 1872.




CHAPTER VI.

     New assistants for 1872--Cost of the excavations--Digging of the
     great platform on the North--Venomous snakes--A supporting buttress
     on the North side of the hill--Objects discovered: little idols of
     fine marble--Whorls engraved with the _suastika_ 卐 and
     [Illustration: block-style cross]--Significance of these emblems in
     the old Aryan religion--Their occurrence among other Aryan
     nations--Mentioned in old Indian literature--Illustrative quotation
     from Émile Burnouf.


On the Hill of Hissarlik, April 5th, 1872.

My last report was dated November 24th, 1871. On the first of this
month, at 6 o’clock on the morning of a glorious day, accompanied by my
wife, I resumed the excavations with 100 Greek workmen from the
neighbouring villages of Renkoï, Kalifatli, and Yenishehr. Mr. John
Latham, of Folkestone, the director of the railway from the Piræus to
Athens, who by his excellent management brings the shareholders an
annual dividend of 30 per cent., had the kindness to give me two of his
best workmen, Theodorus Makrys of Mitylene, and Spiridion Demetrios of
Athens, as foremen. To each of them I pay 150 fr. (6_l._) per month,
while the daily wages of the other men are but 1 fr. 80 cent. Nikolaos
Zaphyros, of Renkoï, gets 6 fr., as formerly; he is of great use to me
on account of his local knowledge, and serves me at once as cashier,
attendant, and cook. Mr. Piat, who has undertaken the construction of
the railroad from the Piræus to Lanira, has also had the kindness to let
me have his engineer, Adolphe Laurent, for a month, whom I shall have to
pay 500 fr. (20_l._), and his travelling expenses. But in addition
there are other considerable expenses to be defrayed, so that the total
cost of my excavations amounts to no less than 300 fr. (12_l._) daily.

Now in order to be sure, in every case, of thoroughly solving the Trojan
question this year, I am having an immense horizontal platform made on
the steep northern slope, which rises at an angle of 40 degrees, a
height of 105 feet perpendicular, and 131 feet above the level of the
sea. The platform extends through the entire hill, at an exact
perpendicular depth of 14 meters or 46½ English feet, it has a
breadth of 79 meters or 233 English feet, and embraces my last year’s
cutting.[102] M. Laurent calculates the mass of matter to be removed at
78,545 cubic meters (above 100,000 cubic yards): it will be less if I
should find the native soil at less than 46 feet, and greater if I
should have to make the platform still lower. It is above all things
necessary for me to reach the primary soil, in order to make accurate
investigations. To make the work easier, after having had the earth on
the northern declivity picked down in such a manner that it rises
perpendicularly to the height of about 8½ feet from the bottom, and
after that at an angle of 50 degrees, I continue to have the _débris_ of
the mighty earth wall loosened in such a manner that this angle always
remains exactly the same. In this way I certainly work three times more
rapidly than before, when, on account of the small breadth of the
channel, I was forced to open it on the summit of the hill in a direct
horizontal direction along its entire length. In spite of every
precaution, however, I am unable to guard my men or myself against the
stones which continually come rolling down, when the steep wall is being
picked away. Not one of us is without several wounds in his feet.

During the first three days of the excavations, in digging down the
slope of the hill, we came upon an immense number of poisonous snakes,
and among them a remarkable quantity of the small brown vipers called
_antelion_ (Ἀντήλιον), which are scarcely thicker than rain worms, and
which have their name from the circumstance that the person bitten by
them only survives till sunset. It seems to me that, were it not for the
many thousands of storks which destroy the snakes in spring and summer,
the Plain of Troy would be uninhabitable, owing to the excessive numbers
of these vermin.

Through the kindness of my friends, Messrs. J. Henry Schröder and Co.,
in London, I have obtained the best English pickaxes and spades for
loosening and pulling down the rubbish, also 60 excellent wheel-barrows
with iron wheels for carrying it away.

For the purpose of consolidating the buildings on the top of the hill,
the whole of the steep northern slope has evidently been supported by a
buttress, for I find the remains of one in several places. This buttress
is however not very ancient, for it is composed of large blocks of
shelly limestone, mostly hewn, and joined with lime or cement. The
remains of this wall have only a slight covering of earth; but on all
other places there is more or less soil, which, at the eastern end of
the platform, extends to a depth of between 6½ and 10 feet. Behind
the platform, as well as behind the remains of the buttress, the
_débris_ is as hard as stone, and consists of the ruins of houses, among
which I find axes of diorite, sling-bullets of loadstone, a number of
flint knives, innumerable handmills of lava, a great number of small
idols of very fine marble, with or without the owl’s-head and woman’s
girdle, weights of clay in the form of pyramids and with a hole at the
point, or made of stone and in the form of balls; lastly, a great many
of those small terra-cotta whorls, which have already been so frequently
spoken of in my previous reports. Two pieces of this kind, with crosses
on the under side, were found in the terramares of Castione and
Campeggine,[103] and are now in the Museum of Parma. Many of these
Trojan articles, and especially those in the form of volcanoes, have
crosses of the most various descriptions, as may be seen in the
lithographed drawings.[104] The form [Illustration: block-style cross]
occurs especially often; upon a great many we find the sign 卐, of which
there are often whole rows in a circle round the central point. In my
earlier reports I never spoke of these crosses, because their meaning
was utterly unknown to me.

[Illustration: Nos. 66, 67, 68. Trojan Sling-bullets of Loadstone (9 and
10 M.).]

This winter, I have read in Athens many excellent works of celebrated
scholars on Indian antiquities, especially Adalbert Kuhn, _Die
Herabkunft des Feuers_; Max Müller’s _Essays_; Émile Burnouf, _La
Science des Religions_ and _Essai sur le Vêda_, as well as several works
by Eugène Burnouf; and I now perceive that these crosses upon the Trojan
terra-cottas are of the highest importance to archæology. I therefore
consider it necessary to enter more fully into the subject, all the more
so as I am now able to prove that both the [Illustration: block-style
cross] and the 卐, which I find in Émile Burnouf’s Sanscrit lexicon,
under the name of “suastika,” and with the meaning εὖ ἐστι, or as the
sign of good wishes, were already regarded, thousands of years before
Christ, as religious symbols of the very greatest importance among the
early progenitors of the Aryan races in Bactria and in the villages of
the Oxus, at a time when Germans, Indians, Pelasgians, Celts, Persians,
Slavonians and Iranians still formed one nation and spoke one language.
For I recognise at the first glance the “suastika” upon one of those
three pot bottoms,[105] which were discovered on Bishop’s Island near
Königswalde on the right bank of the Oder, and have given rise to very
many learned discussions, while no one recognised the mark as that
exceedingly significant religious symbol of our remote ancestors. I find
a whole row of these “suastikas” all round the famous pulpit of Saint
Ambrose in Milan; I find it occurring a thousand times in the catacombs
of Rome.[106] I find it in three rows, and thus repeated sixty times,
upon an ancient Celtic funereal urn discovered in Shropham in the county
of Norfolk, and now in the British Museum.[107] I find it also upon
several Corinthian vases in my own collection, as well as upon two very
ancient Attic vases in the possession of Professor Kusopulos at Athens,
which are assigned to a date as early, at least, as 1000 years before
Christ. I likewise find it upon several ancient coins of Leucas, and in
the large mosaic in the royal palace garden in Athens. An English
clergyman, the Rev. W. Brown Keer, who visited me here, assures me that
he has seen the 卐 innumerable times in the most ancient Hindu temples,
and especially in those of Gaïna.[108] I find in the Ramayana that the
ships of king Rama--in which he carried his troops across the Ganges on
his expedition of conquest to India and Ceylon--bore the 卐 on their
prows. Sanscrit scholars believe that this heroic epic (the _Ramayana_)
was composed at the latest 800 years before Christ, and they assign the
campaign of Rama at the latest to the thirteenth or fourteenth century
B.C., for, as Kiepert points out in his very interesting article in the
_National-Zeitung_, the names of the products mentioned in the 2nd Book
of Kings, in the reign of King Solomon, as brought by Phœnician ships
from Ophir, as for example, ivory, peacocks, apes and spices, are
Sanscrit words with scarcely any alteration. Hence we may surely regard
it as certain, that it took at least three or four centuries before the
language of the conquerors was generally introduced into the immensely
large and densely peopled country of India, especially as the number of
the conquerors cannot have been very large. In the myths of the Rigvêda,
which were written before the expedition into Northern India
(_Heptopotamia_), the Aryan population is always represented as
inconsiderable in numbers.

[Illustration: No. 69. The Foot-print of Buddha.]

Émile Burnouf, in his excellent work _La Science des Religions_, just
published, says, “The 卐 represents the two pieces of wood which were
laid cross-wise upon one another before the sacrificial altars in order
to produce the holy fire (_Agni_), and whose ends were bent round at
right angles and fastened by means of four nails, [Illustration:
suastika with dots], so that this wooden scaffolding might not be moved.
At the point where the two pieces of wood were joined, there was a small
hole, in which a third piece of wood, in the form of a lance (called
_Pramantha_) was rotated by means of a cord made of cow’s hair and hemp,
till the fire was generated by friction. The father of the holy fire
(_Agni_) is Twastri, _i.e._ the divine carpenter, who made the 卐 and the
Pramantha, by the friction of which the divine child was produced. The
Pramantha was afterwards transformed by the Greeks into Prometheus, who,
they imagined, stole fire from heaven, so as to instil into earth-born
man the bright spark of the soul. The mother of the holy fire is the
divine Mâjâ, who represents the productive force in the form of a woman;
every divine being has his Mâjâ. Scarcely has the weak spark escaped
from its mother’s lap, that is from the 卐, which is likewise called
mother, and is the place where the divine Mâjâ principally dwells--when
it (Agni) receives the name of child. In the Rigvêda we find hymns of
heavenly beauty in praise of this new-born weak divine creature. The
little child is laid upon straw; beside it is the mystic cow, that is,
the milk and butter destined as the offering; before it is the holy
priest of the divine Vâju, who waves the small oriental fan in the form
of a flag, so as to kindle life in the little child, which is close upon
expiring. Then the little child is placed upon the altar, where, through
the holy “sôma” (the juice of the tree of life) poured over it, and
through the purified butter, it receives a mysterious power, surpassing
all comprehension of the worshippers. The child’s glory shines upon all
around it; angels (_dêvâs_) and men shout for joy, sing hymns in its
praise, and throw themselves on their faces before it. On its left is
the rising sun, on its right the full moon on the horizon, and both
appear to grow pale in the glory of the new-born god (Agni) and to
worship him. But how did this transfiguration of Agni take place? At the
moment when one priest laid the young god upon the altar, another poured
the holy draught, the spiritual “sôma” upon its head, and then
immediately anointed it by spreading over it the butter of the holy
sacrifice. By being thus anointed Agni receives the name of the Anointed
(_akta_); he has, however, grown enormously through the combustible
substances; rich in glory he sends forth his blazing flames; he shines
in a cloud of smoke which rises to heaven like a pillar, and his light
unites with the light of the heavenly orbs. The god Agni, in his
splendour and glory, reveals to man the secret things; he teaches the
Doctors; he is the Master of the masters, and receives the name of
Jâtavêdas, that is, he in whom wisdom is in-born.

Upon my writing to M. É. Burnouf to enquire about the other symbol, the
cross in the form [Illustration: block-style cross], which occurs
hundreds of times upon the Trojan terra-cottas, he replied, that he
knows with certainty from the ancient scholiasts on the Rigvêda, from
comparative philology, and from the _Monuments figurés_, that
_Suastikas_, in this form also, were employed in the very remotest times
for producing the holy fire. He adds that the Greeks for a long time
generated fire by friction, and that the two lower pieces of wood that
lay at right angles across one another were called “σταυρός,” which word
is either derived from the root “stri,” which signifies lying upon the
earth, and is then identical with the Latin “sternere,” or it is derived
from the Sanscrit word “stâvara,” which means firm, solid, immovable.
Since the Greeks had other means of producing fire, the word σταυρός
passed into simply in the sense of “cross.”

Other passages might be quoted from Indian scholars to prove that from
the very remotest times the 卐 and the [Illustration: block-style cross]
were the most sacred symbols of our Aryan forefathers.

In my present excavations I shall probably find a definite explanation
as to the purpose for which the articles ornamented with such
significant symbols were used; till then I shall maintain my former
opinion, that they either served as _Ex votos_ or as actual idols of
Hephæstus.

[Illustration: No. 70. Large Terra-cotta Vase, with the Symbols of the
Ilian Goddess (4 M.).]




CHAPTER VII.

     Smoking at work forbidden, and a mutiny suppressed--Progress of the
     great platform--Traces of sacrifices--Colossal blocks of stone
     belonging to great buildings--Funereal and other huge
     urns--Supposed traces of Assyrian art--Ancient undisturbed
     remains--Further discoveries of stone implements and owl-faced
     idols--Meaning of the epithet “γλαυκῶπις"--Parallel of Ἥρα βοῶπις,
     and expected discovery of ox-headed idols at Mycenæ--Vases of
     remarkable forms--Dangers and engineering expedients--Georgios
     Photidas--Extent of the Pergamus of Troy--Poisonous snakes, and the
     snake-weed--The whorls with the central sun, stars, the _suastika_,
     the _Sôma_, or Tree of Life, and sacrificial altars--The name of
     Mount Ida, probably brought from Bactria.


On the Hill of Hissarlik, April 25th, 1872.

Since my report of the 5th of this month I have continued the
excavations most industriously with an average of 120 workmen.
Unfortunately, however, seven of these twenty days were lost through
rainy weather and festivals, one day also by a mutiny among my men. I
had observed that the smoking of cigarettes interrupted the work, and I
therefore forbad smoking during working hours, but I did not gain my
point immediately, for I found that the men smoked in secret. I was,
however, determined to carry my point, and caused it to be proclaimed
that transgressors would be forthwith dismissed and never taken on
again. Enraged at this, the workmen from the village of Renkoï--about 70
in number--declared that they would not work, if everyone were not
allowed to smoke as much as he pleased; they left the platform, and
deterred the men from the other villages from working by throwing
stones. The good people had imagined that I would give in to them at
once, as I could not do without them, and that now I could not obtain
workmen enough; that moreover during the beautiful weather it was not
likely that I would sit still a whole day. But they found themselves
mistaken, for I immediately sent my foreman to the other neighbouring
villages and succeeded (to the horror of the 70 Renkoïts, who had waited
the whole night at my door) in collecting 120 workmen for the next
morning without requiring their services. My energetic measures have at
last completely humbled the Renkoïts, from whose impudence I had very
much to put up with during my last year’s excavations, and have also had
a beneficial effect upon all of my present men. Since the mutiny I have
not only been able to prohibit smoking, but even to lengthen the day’s
work by one hour; for, instead of working as formerly from half-past
five in the morning to half-past five in the evening, I now always
commence at five and continue till six in the evening. But, as before, I
allow half an hour at nine and an hour and a half in the afternoon for
eating and smoking.

According to an exact calculation of the engineer, M. A. Laurent, in the
seventeen days since the 1st of the month I have removed about 8500
cubic meters (11,000 cubic yards) of _débris_; this is about 666 cubic
yards each day, and somewhat above 5-1/3 cubic yards each workman.

We have already advanced the platform 49 feet into the hill, but to my
extreme surprise I have not yet reached the primary soil. The opinion I
expressed in my report of the 24th of November of last year, that the
thickness of the hill on the north side had not increased since the
remotest times, I find confirmed as regards the whole western end of my
platform, to a breadth of 45 meters (147½ feet); for it is only upon
the eastern portion of it, to a breadth of 82 feet, that I found 6½
and even 10 feet of soil; below and behind it, as far as 16½ feet
above the platform, there is _débris_ as hard as stone, which appears to
consist only of ashes of wood and animals, the remains of the offerings
presented to the Ilian Athena. I therefore feel perfectly convinced that
by penetrating further into this part I shall come upon the site of the
very ancient temple of the goddess. The ashes of this stratum have such
a clayey appearance, that I should believe it to be the pure earth, were
it not that I find it frequently to contain bones, charcoal, and small
shells, occasionally also small pieces of brick. The shells are
uninjured, which sufficiently proves that they cannot have been exposed
to heat. In this very hard stratum of ash, at 11 feet above the
platform, and 46 feet from its edge, I found a channel made of green
sandstone nearly 8 inches broad and above 7 inches high, which probably
once served for carrying away the blood of the animals sacrificed, and
must necessarily at one time have discharged its contents down the
declivity of the hill. It therefore proves that the thickness of the
hill at this point has increased fully 46 feet since the destruction of
the temple to which it belonged.

[Illustration: No. 71. A Mould of Mica-schist for casting Ornaments (14
M.).]

[Illustration: No. 72. Fragment of a large Urn of Terra-cotta with
Assyrian (?) Decorations, from the Lowest Stratum (14 M.).]

Upon the other 147½ feet of the platform I find everywhere, as far as
to about 16½ feet high, colossal masses of large blocks of shelly
limestone, often more or less hewn, but generally unhewn, which
frequently lie so close one upon another that they have the appearance
of actual walls. But I soon found that all of these masses of stone must
of necessity belong to grand buildings which once have stood there and
were destroyed by a fearful catastrophe. The buildings cannot possibly
have been built of these stones without some uniting substance, and I
presume that this was done with mere earth, for I find no trace of lime
or cement. Between the immense masses of stone there are intermediate
spaces, more or less large, consisting of very firm _débris_, often as
hard as stone, in which we meet with very many bones, shells, and
quantities of other remains of habitation. No traces of any kind of
interesting articles were found in the whole length of the wall of
_débris_, 229½ feet in length and 16¼ feet in height, except a
small splendidly worked hair-or dress-pin of silver, but destroyed by
rust. To-day, however, at a perpendicular depth of 14 meters (46 feet) I
found a beautiful polished piece of mica-schist, with moulds for casting
two breast-pins, and two other ornaments which are quite unknown to
me--all of the most fanciful description. I also found a funereal or
water urn, unfortunately completely broken, with decorations in the form
of two flat wreaths which run right round it. The urn must have been 5
feet high, and at least 27½ inches in breadth. In both of the wreaths
there is an uninterrupted row of cuneiform impressions, which at first
sight seem to be Assyrian inscriptions; but on closer examination it is
found that they are mere ornaments. The fragments of this vase show a
thickness of about ¾ of an inch. Two other enormous urns, but
completely broken, either for water, wine, or funereal ashes, with
decorations in the form of several wreaths, forming perfect circles,
were found on the 22nd and 23rd of this month, at from 19½ to 23 feet
above the platform, and therefore, at a perpendicular depth of from 26
to 33 feet. Both must have been more than 6½ feet high, and more than
3¼ feet in diameter, for the fragments show a thickness of nearly 2
inches. The wreaths are likewise in bas-relief, and show either double
triangles fitting into one another with circles, or flowers, or three
rows or sometimes one row of circles. The last decoration was also found
upon the frieze of green stone which Lord Elgin discovered in the year
1810 in the treasury of Agamemnon in Mycenæ, and which is now in the
British Museum. Both this frieze, and the above-mentioned urns
discovered by me in the depths of Ilium, distinctly point to Assyrian
art, and I cannot look at them without a feeling of sadness when I think
with what tears of joy and with what delight the ever-memorable German
scholar, Julius Braun, who unfortunately succumbed three years ago to
his excessive exertions, would have welcomed their discovery; for he was
not only the great advocate of the theory that the Homeric Troy must be
only looked for below the ruins of Ilium, but he was also the able
defender of the doctrine, that the plastic arts and a portion of the
Egyptian and Assyrian mythology had migrated to Asia Minor and Greece,
and he has shown this by thousands of irrefutable proofs in his profound
and excellent work, _Geschichte der Kunst in ihrem Entwickelungsgange_,
which I most urgently recommend to all who are interested in art and
archæology.

Both the urns found at a depth of 46 feet and those at from 26 to 33
feet, as well as all the funereal urns and large wine or water vessels
which I formerly discovered, were standing upright, which sufficiently
proves that the colossal masses of _débris_ and ruins were gradually
formed on the spot, and could not have been brought there from another
place in order to increase the height of the hill. This is, moreover, a
pure impossibility in regard to the immense numbers of gigantic blocks
of stone, hewn and unhewn, which frequently weigh from 1 to 2 tons.

In the strata at a depth of from 7 to 10 meters (23 to 33 feet), I found
two lumps of lead of a round and concave form, each weighing about two
pounds; a great number of rusted copper nails, also some knives and a
copper lance; further very many smaller and larger knives of white and
brown silex in the form of single and double-edged saws; a number of
whet-stones of green and black slate with a hole at one end, as well as
various small objects of ivory.[109] In all the strata from 4 to 10
meters (13 to 33 feet) deep I found a number of hammers, axes and wedges
of diorite, which, however, are decidedly of much better workmanship in
the strata below the depth of 7 meters (23 feet) than in the upper ones.
Likewise at all depths from 3 meters (10 feet) below the surface we find
a number of flat idols of very fine marble; upon many of them is the
owl’s face and a female girdle with dots; upon one there are in addition
two female breasts.[110] The striking resemblance of these owls’ faces
to those upon many of the vases and covers, with a kind of helmet on the
owl’s head, makes me firmly convinced that all of the idols, and all of
the helmeted owls’ heads represent a goddess, and indeed must represent
one and the same goddess, all the more so as, in fact, all the owl-faced
vases with female breasts and a navel have also generally two upraised
arms: in one case the navel is represented by a cross with four
nails.[111] The cups (covers) with owls’ heads, on the other hand,
never have breasts or a navel, yet upon some of them I find long female
hair represented at the back.[112]

The important question now presents itself:--_What_ goddess is it who is
here found so repeatedly, and is, moreover, the only one to be found,
upon the idols, drinking-cups and vases? The answer is:--She must
necessarily be _the tutelary goddess of Troy_, she must be _the Ilian
Athena_, and this indeed perfectly agrees with the statement of Homer,
who continually calls her θεὰ γλαυκῶπις Ἀθήνη, “the goddess Athena with
the owl’s face.” For the epithet “γλαυκῶπις” has been wrongly translated
by the scholars of all ages, because they could not imagine that Athena
should have been represented with an owl’s face. The epithet, however,
consists of the two words γλαῦξ and ὠπή, and, as I can show by an
immense number of proofs, the only possible literal translation is “with
an owl’s face”; and the usual translation “with blue, fiery or sparkling
eyes” is utterly wrong. The natural conclusion is that owing to
progressive civilization Athena received a human face, and her former
owl’s head was transformed into her favourite bird, the owl, which as
such is unknown to Homer. The next conclusion is that the worship of
Athena as the tutelary goddess of Troy was well known to Homer; hence
that a Troy existed, and that it was situated on the sacred spot, the
depths of which I am investigating.

In like manner, when excavations shall be made in the Heræum between
Argos and Mycenæ, and on the site of the very ancient temple of Hera on
the island of Samos, the image of this goddess with a cow’s head will
doubtless be found upon idols, cups and vases; for “βοῶπις” the usual
epithet of Hera in Homer, can originally have signified nothing else
than “with the face of an ox.” But as Homer also sometimes applies the
epithet βοῶπις to mortal women, it is probable that even at his time it
was considered to be bad taste to represent Hera, the wife of the
mightiest of all the gods, with the face of an ox, and that therefore
men even at that time began to represent her with a woman’s face, but
with the eyes of an ox, that is, with very large eyes; consequently the
common epithet of βοῶπις, which had formerly been only applied to Hera
with the meaning of “with the face of an ox,” now merely signified with
large eyes.

[Illustration: No. 73. Trojan Plates found on the Tower (8 M.).]

Of pottery we have found a great deal during the last weeks, but
unfortunately more than half of it in a broken condition. Of painting
upon terra-cotta there is still no trace; most of the vessels are of a
simple brilliant black, yellow, or brown colour; the very large vases on
the other hand are generally colourless. Plates of ordinary manufacture
I have as yet found only at a depth of from 8 to 10 meters (26 to 33
feet), and, as can be distinctly seen, they have been turned upon a
potter’s wheel. All the other vessels hitherto found seem, however, to
have been formed by the hand alone; yet they possess a certain elegance,
and excite the admiration of beholders by their strange and very curious
forms. The vases with a long neck bent back, a beak-shaped mouth turned
upwards, and a round protruding body[113]--two of which are in the
British Museum, several of those found in Cyprus in the Museum in
Constantinople, and several of those discovered beneath three layers of
volcanic ashes in Thera and Therassia in the French school in
Athens--are almost certainly intended to represent women, for I find the
same here at a depth of from 26 to 33 feet, with two or even with three
breasts, and hence I believe that those found here represent the
tutelary goddess of Ilium. We also find some vases and covers with men’s
faces, which, however, are never without some indications of the owl;
moreover, the vases with such faces always have two female breasts and a
navel. I must draw especial attention to the fact that almost all of the
vases with owls’ faces, or with human faces and the indications of the
owl, have two uplifted arms, which serve as handles, and this leads me
to conjecture that they are imitations of the large idol which was
placed in the very ancient temple of the Ilian divinity, which therefore
must have had an owl’s face, but a female figure, and two arms beside
the head. It is very remarkable that most of the vessels which I find
have been suspended by cords, as is proved by the two holes in the
mouth, and the two little tubes, or holes in the handles, at the side of
the vessels.

[Illustration: No. 74. Vase Cover with a human face. From the Trojan
Stratum (8 M.).]

Unfortunately, many of the terra-cottas get broken when the _débris_ is
being loosened and falls down, for there is only one way in which I can
save my men and myself from being crushed and maimed by the falling
stones: this is, by keeping the lowest part of the mighty earthen wall
on the perpendicular up to 16 feet (not 7 feet, as on the first five
days), and the whole of the upper part at an angle of 50 degrees, by
always loosening the perpendicular portion, by making shafts, and
working with large iron levers in pieces of from 15 to 30 cubic metres
(20 to 40 cubic yards). By thus causing the _débris_ and the stones of
the upper portion to be loosened with the pickaxe, the stones fall in
almost a direct line over the lower perpendicular wall of 16 feet;
therefore they roll at most a few paces, and there is less danger that
anyone will be hurt. By this means I also have the advantage that the
greatest portion of the _débris_ falls down of its own accord, and what
remains can be shovelled down with little trouble, whereas at first I
spent half of my time in getting it down. As, however, in making shafts
and in bringing down the colossal lumps of earth a certain amount of
skill and caution is necessary, I have engaged a third foreman at 7
francs a day, Georgios Photidos, of Paxos, who has for seven years
worked as a miner in Australia, and was there occupied principally in
making tunnels. Home-sickness led him back to his native country, where,
without having sufficient means of earning his daily bread, he, in
youthful thoughtlessness and out of patriotism, married a poor girl of
his own people who was but fifteen years old. It was only after his
marriage, and in consequence of domestic cares, that he recovered his
senses. He heard that I was making excavations here, and came on
speculation to offer me his services. As he had assured me, when I first
saw him, that my accepting his services was a question of life and death
to him and his wife, I engaged him at once, the more so because I was
very much in want of a miner, tunnel-maker, and pitman, such as he is.
Besides acting in these capacities, he is of great use to me on Sundays
and on other festivals, for he can write Greek, and he is thus able to
copy my Greek reports for the newspapers and learned societies in the
East; for I had hitherto found nothing more intolerable than to have to
write out in Greek three times over my long reports about one and the
same subject, especially as I had to take the time from my sleep. To my
great regret, the excellent engineer Adolphe Laurent leaves me
to-morrow, for his month is up, and he has now to commence the
construction of the railroad from the Piræus to Lamia. He has, however,
made me a good plan of this hill. I must add that the Pergamus of Priam
cannot have been limited to this hill, which is, for the most part,
artificial; but that, as I endeavoured to explain four years ago,[114]
it must necessarily have extended a good way further south, beyond the
high plateau. But even if the Pergamus should have been confined to this
hill, it was, nevertheless, larger than the Acropolis of Athens; for the
latter covers only 50,126 square meters (about 60,000 square yards),
whereas the plateau of this hill amounts to 64,500 square meters (about
77,400 square yards). I must further mention that, according to
Laurent’s calculation, the plateau rises 46 feet above my platform, and
that his measurements of its height (about 38 feet on the north and 39
feet on the south) applies to those points where the steep precipice
commences. I have just built a house with three rooms, as well as a
magazine and kitchen, which altogether cost only 1000 francs (40_l._),
including the covering of waterproof felt; for wood is cheap here, and a
plank of about 10 feet in length, 10 inches in breadth, and 1 inch
thick, may be got for 2 piasters, or 40 centimes. (_These houses are
seen in Plates X. and XI._)

We still find poisonous snakes among the stones as far down as from 33
to 36 feet, and I had hitherto been astonished to see my workmen take
hold of the reptiles with their hands and play with them; nay, yesterday
I saw one of the men bitten twice by a viper, without seeming to trouble
himself about it. When I expressed my horror, he laughed, and said that
he and all his comrades knew that there were a great many snakes in this
hill, and they had therefore all drunk a decoction of the snake-weed
which grows in the district, and which renders the bite harmless. Of
course I ordered a decoction to be brought to me, so that I also may be
safe from their bites. I should, however, like to know whether this
decoction would be a safeguard against the fatal effects of the bite of
the hooded cobra, of which in India I have seen a man die within half an
hour; if it were so, it would be a good speculation to cultivate
snake-weed in India.

The frequently-discussed terra-cottas in the form of the volcano and top
(_carrousel_) are continually found in immense numbers, as far as a
depth of from 33 to 36 feet, and most of them have decorations, of which
I always make an accurate drawing.[115] On comparing these drawings, I
now find that all, without exception, represent the sun in the centre,
and that almost the half of the other carvings show either only simple
rays or rays with stars between, or round the edge; or again, three,
four, six, or eight simple, double, treble, and quadruple rising suns in
a circle round the edge.[116] Sometimes the sun is in the centre of the
cross with four nails, which, according to the explanations in my sixth
memoir, can evidently, and in all cases, represent only the instrument
which our Aryan forefathers used for producing the holy fire (Agni), and
which some Sanscrit scholars call “Arani” and others “Suastika.” The
rising sun must have been the most sacred object to our Aryan ancestors;
for, according to Max Müller ('Essays'), out of it--that is, out of its
struggle with the clouds--arose a very large portion of the gods who
afterwards peopled Olympus. Upon some pieces the sun is surrounded by 40
or 50 little stars. I also found one upon which it is represented in
the centre, surrounded by 32 little stars and three 卐; another where one
entire half of the circle is filled by the rays of the sun, which, as in
all cases, occupies the central point; on the other half are two 卐 and
18 little stars, of which twice three (like the sword of Orion) stand in
a row; and another where even four are seen in a row. As M. Émile
Burnouf tells me, three dots in a row, in the Persian cuneiform
inscriptions, denote “royal majesty.” I do not venture to decide whether
the three dots here admit of a similar interpretation. Perhaps they
point to the majesty of the sun-god and of Agni, who was produced out of
the 卐. Upon some of these terra-cottas the sun is even surrounded by
four 卐, which again form a cross by their position round it. Upon
others, again, I find the sun in the centre of a cross formed by four
trees, and each one of these trees has three or four large leaves.[117]
Indian scholars will, perhaps, find these tree-crosses to represent the
framework upon which our ancestors used to produce the holy fire, and
the repeatedly-recurring fifth tree to be the “Pramantha.” I find
representations of this same tree several times, either surrounded by
circles or standing alone, upon small terra-cotta cones of from 1½ to
2-1/3 inches in diameter, which, in addition, have the most various
kinds of symbols and a number of suns and stars. Upon a ball, found at
the depth of 8 meters (26 feet), there is a tree of this kind,
surrounded by stars, opposite a 卐, beside which there is a group of nine
little stars.[118] I therefore venture to express the conjecture that
this tree is the tree of life, which is so frequently met with in the
Assyrian sculptures, and that it is identical with the holy Sôma-tree,
which, according to the Vêdas (see Émile Burnouf, Max Müller, Adalbert
Kuhn, and Fr. Windischmann), grows in heaven, and is there guarded by
the Gandharvas, who belong to the primeval Aryan period, and
subsequently became the Centaurs of the Greeks. Indra, the sun-god, in
the form of a falcon,[119] stole from heaven this Sôma-tree, from which
trickled the Amrita (ambrosia) which conferred immortality. Fr.
Windischmann[120] has pointed out the existence of the Sôma-tree worship
as common to the tribes of Aryans before their separation, and he
therefore justly designates it an inheritance from their most ancient
traditions.[121] Julius Braun[122] says, in regard to this Sôma-tree:
“Hermes, the rare visitor, is regaled with nectar and ambrosia. This is
the food which the gods require in order to preserve their immortality.
It has come to the West from Central Asia, with the whole company of the
Olympian gods; for the root of this conception is the tree of life in
the ancient system of Zoroaster. The fruit and sap of this tree of life
bestows immortality, and the future Messiah (_Sosiosh_, in the Zend
writings) will give some of it to all the faithful and make them all
immortal. This hope we have seen fully expressed in the Assyrian
sculptures, where the winged genii stand before the holy tree with a
vessel containing the juice and fruit.”

Just now two of those curious little terra-cottas, in the form of a
volcano, were brought to me, upon one of which three animals with
antlers are engraved in a circle round the sun;[123] upon another there
are four signs (which I have hitherto not met with) in the shape of
large combs with long teeth, forming a cross round the sun.[124] I
conjecture that these extremely remarkable hieroglyphics, which at first
sight might be imagined to be actual letters, can by no means represent
anything else than the sacrificial altar with the flames blazing upon
it. I do not doubt moreover, that in the continuation of the excavations
I shall find this comb-shaped sign together with other symbols, which
will confirm my conjectures.

[Illustration: No. 75. A Whorl, with three animals (3 M.).]

I must also add that the good old Trojans may perhaps have brought with
them from Bactria the name of Ida, which they gave to the mountain which
I see before me to the south-east, covered with snow, upon which Jove
and Hera held dalliance,[125] and from which Jove looked down upon Ilium
and upon the battles in the Plain of Troy, for, according to Max
Müller,[126] Ida was the wife of Dyaus (Zeus), and their son was Eros.
The parents whom Sappho ascribes to Eros--Heaven and Earth--are
identical with his Vedic parents. Heracles is called Ἰδαῖος, from his
being identical with the Sun, and he has this name in common with Apollo
and Jove.

To-morrow the Greek Easter festival commences, during which
unfortunately there are six days on which no work is done. Thus I shall
not be able to continue the excavations until the 1st of May.




CHAPTER VIII.

     Hindrances through Greek festivals--Thickness of the layers of
     _débris_ above the native rock--Date of the foundation of
     Troy--Impossibility of the _Bunarbashi_ theory--Homeric epithets
     suitable to Hissarlik--Etymology of Ἴλιος, signifying probably the
     “fortress of the Sun"--The _Aruna_ of the Egyptian
     records--Progress of the platform, and corresponding excavation on
     the south--The bulwark of Lysimachus--Ruins of great
     buildings--Marks of civilization increasing with the depth--Vases,
     and fragments of great urns--A remarkable terra-cotta--A whorl with
     the appearance of an inscription.


On the Hill of Hissarlik, May 11th, 1872.

Since my report of the 25th of last month I have only been able to have
ten days’ digging, owing to the various Greek festivals, for even the
poorest Greek of this district would not work on a church festival even
if he could earn 1000 francs in an hour. Turkish workmen were not to be
had, for they are at present occupied with field work. The weather has
been and still is very favourable for making excavations, as the heat
during the day does not yet rise above 20° Réaumur (77° Fahrenheit) in
the shade, and then it never rains here from the beginning of May till
October, except during thunderstorms, and they rarely last more than
half an hour at a time. Moreover, the Plain of Troy is at present still
healthy; the notorious Trojan fevers do not actually begin till July,
when the many stagnant waters have evaporated, and the pestilential
miasma arises from the decomposition of the millions of dead frogs, and
from the dried-up marshes, the ground of which cracks with the heat of
the sun. My wife and I have therefore still six weeks before us, with
the precaution of taking quinine to guard against fever.

I have cleared out the Roman well, which has been repeatedly mentioned,
to a depth of 20 meters (65½ feet), and I find that it is walled only
as far as 52½ feet below the surface of the hill, and then runs into
the limestone rock which forms the native soil. I have caused Georgios
Photidas to make a small tunnel in this rock from the well, and have now
become quite convinced that the ground--upon which, according to Homer,
the Trojan king Dardanus, who had up to that time lived at the foot of
many-fountained Ida, built the town of Dardania (Troy) in the
Plain[127]--is covered with a layer of _débris_ about 16 meters, or
52½ English feet, thick. I must here remind the reader that the ruins
of the Greek colony, which settled on the spot, scarcely extend to a
depth of 6½ feet; that consequently if, with Strabo (XIII. 1, 43) we
suppose the establishment of this colony to have taken place under the
Lydian dominion, that is about 700 B.C., and calculate the duration of
the reigns of the six kings (Dardanus, Erichthonios, Tros, Ilus,
Laomedon, and Priam) who, according to the Iliad (XX. 215-240), preceded
the destruction of Troy, at 200 years, and thus presume the town to have
been founded about 1400 years before Christ, the accumulation of
_débris_ must in this place have amounted to 14 meters, or 46 feet,
during the first 700 years.

I am firmly convinced that, on a glance at my excavations, every one of
the remaining advocates of the antiquated theory that Troy is to be
looked for at the back of the Plain, upon the heights of Bunarbashi,
will at once condemn that theory, for the Acropolis and town which once
stood upon those heights, and the small area of which is accurately
defined by the ruins of the surrounding walls and by the precipices, is
scarcely large enough to have contained a population of 2000 souls; the
accumulation of _débris_ moreover is extremely small. In many places,
even in the middle of the Acropolis, the naked rock protrudes, and
between the area of this small town and Bunarbashi the ground--in some
places pointed, in others abrupt, but in all parts irregular--shows that
no village, much less a town, can ever have stood upon it. Immediately
above Bunarbashi, and in fact wherever there was any earth at all, I and
my guide, with five workmen, made (in August 1868) a long series of
borings at distances of 100 meters (328 feet) apart, as far as the
Scamander, but we found the primary soil in all cases directly, and the
rock at quite an insignificant depth; and nowhere was there a trace of
fragments of pottery or other indications that the place could ever have
been inhabited by human beings. Even in Bunarbashi itself I found the
primary soil at a depth of less than 2 feet. Besides this, if Troy had
been built at the back of the Plain, upon the heights of Bunarbashi,
Homer (_Iliad_, XX. 216-218) would not have expressly said that previous
to its foundation by Dardanus it had not yet been built in the Plain.

The primary soil of Hissarlik is indeed less than 20 meters (65½
feet) above the Plain, immediately at the foot of the hill; but at all
events the Plain itself, and especially that part bordering upon the
hill, has increased in height considerably in the course of 31
centuries. But even if this had not been the case, still the Troy built
upon this hill running out into the Plain would, on account of its high
and imposing position, deserve the Homeric epithets of ὀφρυόεσσα,
αἰπεινή, and ἠνεμόεσσα, especially the latter; for one of my greatest
troubles here is the continual high wind, and it cannot possibly have
been otherwise in Homer’s time. It is assuredly time that the Bunarbashi
theory, which stands in direct contradiction with all the statements of
the Iliad, should now at last come to an end. The theory, in fact, would
never have arisen had its advocates, instead of spending one hour,
remained a whole day on the heights, and made investigations even with
the aid of a single workman.

As I observed in my last report, I here find the sun represented in the
centre of all the innumerable round ornamented terra-cottas in the form
of the volcano and top (_carrousel_), and yesterday I even found one
upon which the central sun was surrounded by five other suns, each of
them with twelve rays.[128]

I know very well that some would derive the name of the town of Ilium
(Ἴλιος or Ἴλιον) from the Sanscrit word _vilû_, “fortress,” and Ἥλιος
from a lost masculine form of Σελήνη, probably Σείριος, and the thought
involuntarily forces itself upon me, when looking at the above-mentioned
terra-cottas with the five suns in a circle round the central sun, that
the image of the Sun which occurs thousands and thousands of times must
be connected with the name of Troy, namely Ἴλιος, for Ἴλιον only occurs
once in Homer (Iliad, XV. 71); he always elsewhere speaks of Ἴλιος, and
always uses this word as a feminine. Homer, it is true, always says
Ἠέλιος instead of Ἥλιος, but in my opinion the root of both is ἕλη or
εἵλη, from the verb αἱρέω, the aorist of which is εἷλον. In Germany,
according to the Erasmian pronunciation εἵλη is certainly pronounced
_heila_, and εἷλον, _heilon_; but in the modern Greek pronunciation εἵλη
is _ili_; εἷλον, _ilon_; and Ἥλιος, _ilios_. There are a number of
proofs that the Erasmian pronunciation is radically wrong, and that the
modern Greek is the correct one. Among these I will only mention that
all the Greek words which passed over into the Russian language, when
Russia embraced Christianity 900 years ago, are pronounced in Russian
exactly as they still are in Greece; and moreover that those who
decipher the Assyrian cuneiform inscriptions (especially, I believe, J.
Oppert, in Paris), have pointed out that the Greek names, which occur in
these inscriptions from the time of the Seleucidæ, are represented in
the cuneiform writing exactly according to the modern Greek
pronunciation. Now, if out of the word εἵλη, ἕλη, or εἷλον, there has
arisen Ἠέλιος and Ἥλιος, then surely by the sameness of the
pronunciation there may have arisen out of one of the first three words
in pre-Homeric times Ἴλιος in the feminine for πόλις Ἡλίου or Ἰλίου,
signifying “Sun-castle,” for the earlier meaning of πόλις was certainly
castle, fortress, or acropolis, as for instance in the Iliad, VI. 88,
257, 317, XXII. 383. Although I am well aware that Egyptian scholars
have hitherto found no relationship between the hieroglyphic and
Sanscrit languages, yet I cannot help mentioning that three years ago,
in the Institute of France, I heard a lecture by the Vicomte de Rougé,
who had found in a papyrus the names of the powers leagued against
Rameses III., and among these the state of _Arouna_ or _Aruna_, which he
without hesitation identified with Ilium, as he thought that this was
the only way in which the latter word could be rendered in the
hieroglyphic language. Now, curiously enough, according to Max
Müller[129] and Adalbert Kuhn,[130] the Sanscrit word _Aruna_ signifies
“charioteer of the sun.” I leave it to Egyptian and Sanscrit scholars to
judge whether and how far this may serve to confirm what I have said
above.

Although since Easter I have been obliged to pay my men 1 piaster more
per diem, which makes their wages 10 piasters or 2 francs a day, still I
am now working with 130 men; and I firmly hope by the 1st of October to
have carried my great platform through the entire hill, preserving
exactly the same breadth; for while my wife and I, with 85 workmen, are
busy on the platform on the north side, Georgios Photidas and 45 men
have for 10 days been working towards us from a second platform on the
south side. Unfortunately, however, the slope of the hill on the south
side is so slight, that we were forced to begin this work 16¼ feet
below the surface, in order to have room and freedom for removing the
_débris_; we have, however, given it a dip of 14°, so that it must reach
the primary soil at a length of about 75 meters (246 feet). This
southern platform is under the sole direction of Georgios Photidas, for
he has proved himself to be a very skilful engineer, and he works
forward very quickly through his cleverly devised side terraces. He has
hitherto, however, had only light _débris_ to remove, and has not yet
come upon that very hard, tough, damp _débris_ which I have on my
platform at the depth of 10 to 16 meters (33 to 52½ feet). To-day he
has brought to light a splendid bastion, composed of large finely-hewn
blocks of limestone, not joined by either cement or lime, which,
however, does not seem to me to be older than the time of Lysimachus. It
is certainly very much in our way, but it is too beautiful and venerable
for me to venture to lay hands upon it, so it shall be preserved.

On the south side the accumulation of _débris_ from the Greek period is
much more considerable than on the north side and upon the plateau; and
thus far Georgios Photidas constantly finds Greek pottery and those
terra-cottas with two holes at one end, which, in my excavations
hitherto, ceased entirely at a depth of 2 meters (6½ feet). The
greater portion of these round articles have the potter’s stamp already
mentioned, representing a bee or fly with outspread wings above an
altar. (_See Cuts_, Nos. 37-40, p. 65.)

I have also given the platform on the north side an inclination of 10°
in a length of 66 feet, so as to be able to work forward on the primary
soil, without the indescribable trouble of lowering it another 6½
feet, and of thus having to remove 4000 cubic yards of _débris_. This
primary soil sufficiently proves that all those enormous masses of
immense stones, generally more or less hewn, with which, as already
said, I had continually to battle at a depth of from 10 to 14 meters (33
to 46 feet), are the remains of large buildings, which in the course of
centuries have been erected successively upon the ruins of others. For
it does not appear conceivable to me that even a large palace, were it
six storeys high, could leave such colossal ruins, which, as they reach
down to the rock, are nearly 20 feet in height.

For some days these masses of stone have diminished in number, but we
continually find many single large blocks. Instead of the stone strata,
however, we now have before us, upon the whole breadth of the platform
(230 feet), and to the height of 20 feet (hence at a depth of from 10 to
16 meters, 33 to 52½ feet), a damp wall as hard as stone, composed of
ashes mixed with small shells, bones, boars’ tusks, &c., exactly like
that which we before found at the east end. This mass is so tough, that
it is only by making shafts, and breaking down the walls by means of
huge iron levers, that we manage to get on at all.

The signs of a higher civilization increasing with the greater
depth--which I mentioned in my last report when speaking of the large
urn with Assyrian inscriptions--continue down to the native soil. Close
above it I find a great quantity of fragments of brilliant black and
sometimes red or brown pottery, with engraved decorations, of a quality
more excellent than I have hitherto met with even in the highest strata,
among the ruins of the Greek period. I also found several fragments of
cups, the lower part of which likewise forms a cup, but not a large one,
and hence I do not doubt that these are fragments of double cups (δέπας
ἀμφικύπελλον). In Homer it indeed seems as if all double cups were made
of gold or silver with a gilt rim,[131] but I do not doubt that there
were at the same time also double cups made of clay.[132]

[Illustration: No. 76. Fragment of a Vase of polished black Earthenware,
with Pattern inlaid in White, from the Lowest Stratum (14 M.).]

The other vessels, of which I found fragments, were made so as to be
carried by strings, as is proved by the two rings projecting beside one
another on either side. I also found upon the primary soil the head of a
brilliant black pitcher, with a beak-shaped mouth bent back; also the
fragment of a vessel painted white, but divided into two compartments by
black lines drawn horizontally; the upper compartment contains
undulating black lines, which are perhaps meant to represent water, the
lower one is filled with a row of arrow-shaped decorations, with square
pointed heads, in the centre of which there is always a dot.

[Illustration: No. 77. Fragment of Terra-cotta, perhaps part of a box,
found on the primitive Rock (16 M.).]

At the same depth I found fragments of large water or funereal urns with
engraved ornaments of various descriptions; also a square piece of
terra-cotta painted black and ornamented all round with lines and four
rows of dots filled with a white substance. As appears from the upper
and the lower side, and from the two perforations, it must have been the
setting and decoration of a wooden jewel-casket. It is made with so much
symmetry and looks so elegant, that I at first thought it was ebony
inlaid with ivory.

At the depth of 8 meters (26 feet) I found a terra-cotta seal an inch
and a half in length, with a hole for suspending it; there are a number
of signs upon it resembling the ancient Koppa--like that stamped upon
Corinthian coins.[133]

At a depth of 5 meters (16¼ feet), I found to-day a very pretty jar
with three feet, which is evidently intended to represent a woman,
probably the Ilian Athena, for it has two breasts and a navel.

[Illustration: No. 78. A Trojan Terra-cotta Seal (8 M.).]

The snakes seem to have been enticed out of their winter quarters by the
warm weather which has set in; for it is ten days since I have seen any.

Amid all the fatigues and troubles of the excavations there is this
among other pleasures, that time never hangs heavy on one’s hands.

[Illustration: No. 78ª. Terra-cottas with Aryan Emblems.]




CHAPTER IX.

     Superstition of the Greeks about saints’ days--Further engineering
     works--Narrow escape of six men--Ancient building on the western
     terrace--The ruins under this house--Old Trojan mode of
     building--Continued marks of higher civilization--Terra-cottas
     engraved with Aryan symbols: antelopes, a man in the attitude of
     prayer, flaming altars, hares--The symbol of the moon--Solar
     emblems and rotating wheels--Remarks on former supposed
     inscriptions--Stone moulds for casting weapons and
     implements--Absence of cellars, and use of colossal jars in their
     stead--The quarry used for the Trojan buildings--“Un Médecin malgré
     lui."--Blood-letting priest-doctors--Efficacy of
     sea-baths--Ingratitude of the peasants cured--Increasing heat.


On the Hill of Hissarlik, May 23rd, 1872.

Since my report of the 11th instant there have again been, including
to-day, three great and two lesser Greek church festivals, so that out
of these twelve days I have in reality only had seven days of work. Poor
as the people are, and gladly as they would like to work, it is
impossible to persuade them to do so on feast days, even if it be the
day of some most unimportant saint. Μᾶς δέρνει ὁ ἅγιος ("the saint will
strike us”) is ever their reply, when I try to persuade the poor
creatures to set their superstition aside for higher wages.

In order to hasten the works, I have now had terraces made at from 16 to
19 feet above the great platform on its east and west ends; and I have
also had two walls made of large blocks of stone--the intermediate
spaces being filled with earth--for the purpose of removing the
_débris_. The smaller wall did not seem to me to be strong enough, and I
kept the workmen from it; in fact, it did not bear the pressure, and it
fell down when it was scarcely finished. Great trouble was taken with
the larger and higher wall: it was built entirely of large stones, for
the most part hewn, and all of us, even Georgios Photidas, thought it
might last for centuries. But nevertheless on the following morning I
thought it best to have a buttress of large stones erected, so as to
render it impossible for the wall to fall; and six men were busy with
this work when the wall suddenly fell in with a thundering crash. My
fright was terrible and indescribable, for I quite believed that the six
men must have been crushed by the mass of stones; to my extreme joy,
however, I heard that they had all escaped directly, as if by a miracle.

In spite of every precaution, excavations in which men have to work
under earthen walls of above 50 feet in perpendicular depth are always
very dangerous. The call of “guarda, guarda” is not always of avail, for
these words are continually heard in different places. Many stones roll
down the steep walls without the workmen noticing them, and when I see
the fearful danger to which we are all day exposed, I cannot but
fervently thank God, on returning home in the evening, for the great
blessing that another day has passed without an accident. I still think
with horror of what would have become of the discovery of Ilium and of
myself, had the six men been crushed by the wall which gave way; no
money and no promises could have saved me; the poor widows would have
torn me to pieces in their despair--for the Trojan women have this in
common with all Greeks of their sex, that the husband, be he old or
young, rich or poor, is everything to them; heaven and earth have but a
secondary interest.

Upon the newly made western terrace, directly beside my last year’s
excavation, we have laid bare a portion of a large building--the walls
of which are 6¼ feet thick, and consist for the most part of hewn
blocks of limestone joined with clay. (_No. 24 on Plan II._) None of the
stones seem to be more than 1 foot 9 inches long, and they are so
skilfully put together, that the wall forms a smooth surface. This house
is built upon a layer of yellow and brown ashes and ruins, at a depth of
6 meters (20 feet), and the portion of the walls preserved reaches up to
within 10 feet below the surface of the hill. In the house, as far as we
have as yet excavated, we found only one vase, with two breasts in front
and one breast at the side; also a number of those frequently mentioned
round terra-cottas in the form of the volcano and top, all of which have
five or six quadruple rising suns in a circle round the central
sun.[134] These objects, as well as the depth of 6 meters (20 feet), and
the architecture of the walls described above, leave no doubt that the
house was built centuries before the foundation of the Greek colony, the
ruins of which extend only to a depth of 6½ feet. It is with a
feeling of great interest that, from this great platform, that is, at a
perpendicular height of from 33 to 42 feet, I see this very ancient
building (which may have been erected 1000 years before Christ) standing
as it were in mid air. To my regret, however, it must in any case be
pulled down, to allow us to dig still deeper. As I said before, directly
below this house there is a layer of ruins consisting of yellow and
brown ashes, and next, as far as the terrace, there are four layers more
of ashes and other _débris_, each of which represents the remains of one
house at least. Immediately above the terrace, that is 13 feet below the
foundation of that very ancient house, I find a wall about 6 feet thick,
built of large blocks of limestone, the description of which I must
reserve for my next report, for a large portion of the building I have
mentioned, and immense masses of the upper strata of _débris_, as well
as the high earthen wall of the terrace (26 feet thick and 20 feet high)
must be pulled down, before I can lay bare any portion of this wall and
investigate how far down it extends. If it reaches to or even
approaches the primary soil, then I shall reverently preserve it. (See
No. 25 on Plan II.) It is a very remarkable fact, that this is the first
wall built of large stones that I have hitherto found at the depth of
from 10 to 16 meters (33 to 52½ feet).[135] I cannot explain this,
considering the colossal masses of loose stones which lie irregularly
beside one another (especially at a depth of from 36 to 52½ feet), in
any other way than by supposing that the houses of the Trojans were
built of blocks of limestone joined with clay, and consequently easily
destroyed. If my excavations are not interrupted by any accident, I
hope, in this at all events, to make some interesting discoveries very
soon, with respect to this question.

Unfortunately during the last twelve days I have not been able to pull
down much of the lower firm earth-wall, for, in order to avoid fatal
accidents, I have had to occupy myself especially in making and
enlarging the side terraces. I have now, however, procured enormous iron
levers of nearly 10 feet in length and 6 inches in circumference, and I
thus hope henceforth to be able at once to break down, by means of
windlasses, the hardest of the earth-walls, which are 10 feet thick, 66
broad, and from 16 to 26 feet high. In the small portion of the
earth-wall pulled down during these last days, I repeatedly found the
most irrefutable proofs of a higher civilization; but I will only
mention one of these, a fragment of a brilliant dark grey vessel which I
have at present lying before me, found at a depth of 15 meters (49
feet). It may probably have been nearly 2 feet in diameter, and it has
decorations both outside and inside, which consist of engraved
horizontal and undulating lines. The former are arranged in three sets
in stripes of five lines, and the lowest space is adorned with eight and
the following with five undulating lines, which are probably meant to
represent the waves of the sea; of the next set no part has been
preserved; the thickness of the clay is just 3/5 of an inch.

[Illustration: No. 79. Fragment of a brilliant dark-grey Vessel, from
the Lowest Stratum (15 M.). _a_ Inside; _b_ Outside.]

In my report of the 25th of last month,[136] I mentioned the discovery
of one of those terra-cottas upon which were engraved three animals with
antlers in the circle round the central sun. Since then four others of
these remarkable objects with similar engravings have been discovered.
Upon one of them, found at a depth of 6 meters (20 feet), there are only
two animals with antlers in the circle round the sun, and at the end of
each antler, and connected with it, is an exceedingly curious sign
resembling a large candlestick or censer, which is certainly an
especially important symbol, for it is repeatedly found here standing
alone.[137] Upon a second, there is below a rough representation of a
man who seems to be praying, for he has both arms raised towards heaven;
this position reminds us forcibly of the two uplifted arms of the
owl-faced vases; to the left is an animal with but two feet and two
trees on its back.[138] Indian scholars will perhaps find that this is
intended to represent the falcon, in which shape the sun-god stole the
sacred sôma-tree from heaven. Then follow two animals with two horns,
probably antelopes, which are so frequently met with upon ancient Greek
vases, and which in the Rigvêda are always made to draw the chariot of
the winds. Upon a third terra-cotta there are three of these antelopes
with one or two rows of stars above the back, which perhaps are intended
to represent heaven; then five fire-machines, such as our Aryan
ancestors used; lastly, a sign in zigzag, which, as already said, cannot
represent anything but the flaming altar.[139] Upon the fourth whorl are
four hares, the symbols of the moon, forming a cross round the sun. They
probably represent the four seasons of the year.[140]

At a depth of 14 meters (46 feet) we found to-day two of those round
articles of a splendidly brilliant black terra-cotta, which are only 3/5
of an inch in height, but 2-1/3 inches in diameter, and have five triple
rising suns and five stars in the circle round the central sun. All of
these decorations, which are engraved, as in every other case, are
filled in with a very fine white substance. When looking at these
curious articles, one of which is exactly the shape of a
carriage-wheel,[141] the thought involuntarily strikes me that they are
symbols of the sun’s chariot, which, as is well known, is symbolized in
the Rigvêda by a wheel, and that all and each of these articles met with
in the upper strata (although their form deviates from that of a wheel
on account of their greater thickness) cannot be anything but
degenerated representations of the sun’s wheel. I conjecture this all
the more, because not only is the sun the central point of all the
round terra-cottas, but it is almost always surrounded by one, two,
three, four or five circles, which may represent the nave of the wheel.
At a depth of 16 meters (52½ feet) we found a round terra-cotta,
which is barely an inch in diameter, and a fifth of an inch thick; there
are five concentric circles round the central point, and between the
fourth and fifth circle oblique little lines, which are perhaps meant to
denote the rotation of the wheel.

[Illustration: No. 80. Whorl with pattern of a moving Wheel (16 M.).]

I must here again refer to the round terra-cotta mentioned in my report
of the 18th of November, 1871,[142] and to my regret I must now express
my firm conviction that there are no letters upon it, but only
symbolical signs; that for instance the upper sign (which is almost
exactly the same as that upon the terra-cotta lately cited)[143] must
positively represent a man in an attitude of prayer, and that the three
signs to the left can in no case be anything but the fire-machine of our
Aryan ancestors, the 卐 little or not at all changed. The sign which then
follows, and which is connected with the fourth and sixth signs, I also
find, at least very similar ones, on the other, cited in the same
report, but I will not venture to express an opinion as to what it may
mean.[144] The sixth sign (the fifth from the figure in prayer) is very
like the Phœnician letter “Nun,” but in my opinion cannot be a letter,
for how would it be possible to find a single Semitic letter, between
Aryan religious symbols? Its great resemblance to the zigzag sign of
other examples,[145] which I recognise to be lightning, leads me to
suppose that it likewise can only represent lightning.

All the primitive symbols of the Aryan race, which I find upon the
Trojan terra-cottas, must be symbols of good men, for surely only such
would have been engraved upon the thousands of terra-cottas met with
here. Yet these symbols remind one forcibly of the “σήματα λυγρά” and
“θυμοφθόρα,” which King Prœtus of Tiryns gave to Bellerophon to take to
his father-in-law in Lycia.[146] Had he scratched a symbol of good
fortune, for instance a 卐, upon the folded tablet, it would assuredly
have sufficed to secure him a good reception, and protection. But he
gave him the symbol of death, that he might be killed.

[Illustration: No. 81. Whorl with Symbols of Lightning (7. M.).]

The five [six] characters found on a small terra-cotta disc at a depth
of 24 feet, and which in my report of November 18th, 1871,[147] I
considered to be Phœnician, have unfortunately been proved not to be
Phœnician, for M. Ernest Renan of Paris, to whom I sent the small disc,
finds nothing Phœnician in the symbols, and maintains that I could not
find anything of the kind in Troy, as it was not the custom of the
Phœnicians to write upon terra-cotta, and moreover that, with the
exception of the recently discovered Moabite inscription of King Mesha,
no Phœnician inscription has ever been found belonging to a date
anterior to 500 years B.C.

[Illustration: No. 82. Two fragments of a great Mould of Mica-schist for
casting Copper Weapons and Ornaments (14 M.).]

I may also remark, with regard to my last year’s excavations, that I
have now found quadrangular pieces of mica-schist and chlorite slate,
from nearly 6 inches to nearly 11 inches long, and from about 1¼ to
3½ inches thick, which have on all four sides, and several of them on
six sides, forms or moulds for casting weapons and instruments; and
further, that the channelled pieces, spoken of in the report of November
18th, 1871,[148] are nothing but fragments of similar stone-moulds; the
brilliant, glossy appearance of the slate seems to have been produced by
simple polishing.

Of cellars, such as we have in civilized countries, I have as yet found
not the slightest trace, either in the strata of the Hellenic or in
those of the pre-Hellenic period; earthen vessels seem everywhere to
have been used in their stead. On my southern platform, in the strata of
Hellenic times, I have already had ten such vessels dug out in an
uninjured condition; they are from 5¾ to 6½ feet high, and from 2
to 4½ feet in diameter, but without decorations.[149] I sent seven of
these jars (πίθοι) to the Museum in Constantinople.

In the strata of the pre-Hellenic period I find an immense number of
these πίθοι, but I have as yet only succeeded in getting two of them out
uninjured, from a depth of 26 feet; these are about 3½ feet high and
26¾ inches in diameter; they have only unimportant decorations.

In my last communication, I was able to speak of a lesser number of the
blocks of stone obstructing the works upon the great platform; to-day,
however, I have again unfortunately to report a considerable increase of
them.

At a distance of scarcely 328 yards from my house, on the south side,
and at the part of the plateau of Ilium in a direct perpendicular line
below the ruined city wall, which seems to have been built by
Lysimachus, I have now discovered the stone quarry, whence all those
colossal masses of shelly limestone (_Muschelkalk_) were obtained, which
the Trojans and their successors, down to a time after the Christian
era, employed in building their houses and walls, and which have given
my workmen and me such inexpressible anxiety, trouble, and labour. The
entrance to the quarry, which is called by the native Greeks and Turks
“lagum” ("mine” or “tunnel,” from the Arabic word لغم, which has passed
over into Turkish), is filled with rubbish, but, as I am assured by all
the people about here, it was still open only 20 years ago, and, as my
excavations have proved, it was very large. The town, as seems to be
indicated by a continuous elevation extending below the quarry, had a
double surrounding wall at this point, and this was in fact necessary,
for otherwise the enemy would have been able, with no further
difficulty, to force his way into the quarry below the town-wall, as the
entrance to the quarry was outside of the wall.

Unfortunately, without possessing the slightest knowledge of medicine, I
have become celebrated here as a physician, owing to the great quantity
of quinine and tincture of arnica which I brought with me and
distributed liberally, and by means of which, in October and November of
last year, I cured all fever patients and wounds. In consequence of
this, my valuable time is now claimed in a troublesome manner by sick
people, who frequently come from a distance of many miles, in order to
be healed of their complaints by my medicine and advice. In all the
villages of this district, the priest is the parish doctor, and as he
himself possesses no medicines, and is ignorant of their properties, and
has besides an innate dislike to cold water and all species of washing,
he never uses any other means than bleeding, which, of course, often
kills the poor creatures. Wrinkles on either side of the lips of
children from 10 to 12 years of age show that the priest has repeatedly
bled them. Now I hate the custom of bleeding, and am enthusiastically in
favour of the cold-water cure; hence I never bleed anyone, and I
prescribe sea-bathing for almost all diseases; this can be had here by
everyone, except myself, who have no time for it. My ordering these
baths has given rise to such confidence, nay enthusiasm, that even
women, who fancied that it would be their death to touch their bodies
with cold water, now go joyfully into the water and take their dip.
Among others, a fortnight ago, a girl of seventeen from Neo-Chori was
brought to me; her body was covered with ulcers, especially her face,
and one terrible ulcer on the left eye had made it quite useless. She
could scarcely speak, walk or stand, and, as her mother said, she had no
appetite; her chest had fallen in, and she coughed. I saw immediately
that excessive bleeding and the consequent want of blood had given rise
to all her ailments, and therefore I did not ask whether she had been
bled, but how many times. The answer was, the girl had taken cold, and
the parish priest had bled her seven times in one month. I gave her a
dose of castor oil, and ordered her a sea bath every day, and that, when
she had recovered sufficient strength, her father should put her through
some simple passive gymnastic exercises--which I carefully described--in
order to expand her chest. I was quite touched when early this morning
the same girl appeared on the platform, threw herself on the ground,
kissed my dirty shoes, and told me, with tears of joy that even the
first sea bath had given her an appetite, that all the sores had begun
to heal directly, and had now disappeared, but that the left eye was
still blind, otherwise she was perfectly well, for even the cough had
left her. I, of course, cannot cure the eye; it seems to me to be
covered with a skin which an oculist might easily remove. The girl had
come on foot from Neo-Chori, a distance of three hours, to thank me, and
I can assure my readers that this is the first case, in the Plain of
Troy, in which I have received thanks for medicines or medical advice;
but I am not even quite sure whether it was a feeling of pure gratitude
that induced the girl to come to me, or whether it was in the hope that
by some other means I might restore sight to the blind eye.

The heat has increased considerably during the last few days; the
thermometer stands the whole day at 25° Réaumur (88¼° Fahrenheit) in
the shade.

[Illustration: PLATE VI.

_Page 143._

TROJAN BUILDINGS ON THE NORTH SIDE, AND IN THE GREAT TRENCH CUT THROUGH
THE WHOLE HILL.]




CHAPTER X.

     A third platform dug--Traces of former excavations by the
     Turks--Block of triglyphs, with bas-relief of Apollo--Fall of an
     earth-wall--Plan of a trench through the whole hill--Admirable
     remains in the lowest stratum but one--The plain and engraved
     whorls--Objects of gold, silver, copper, and ivory--Remarkable
     terra-cottas--The pottery of the _lowest stratum_ quite distinct
     from that of the next above--Its resemblance to the Etruscan, in
     quality only--Curious funereal urns--Skeleton of a six months’
     embryo--Other remains in the lowest stratum--Idols of fine marble,
     the sole exception to the superior workmanship of this stratum--The
     houses and palaces of the lowest stratum, of large stones joined
     with earth--Disappearance of the first people with the destruction
     of their town.

     The _second settlers_, of a different civilization--Their buildings
     of unburnt brick on stone foundations--These bricks burnt by the
     great conflagration--Destruction of the walls of the former
     settlers--Live toads coëval with Troy!--Long duration of the second
     settlers--Their Aryan descent proved by Aryan symbols--Various
     forms of their pottery--Vases in the form of animals--The whorls of
     this stratum--Their interesting devices--Copper weapons and
     implements, and moulds for casting--Terra-cotta seals--Bracelets
     and ear-rings, of silver, gold, and electrum--Pins, &c., of ivory
     and bone--Fragments of a lyre--Various objects.

     _The third stratum_: the remains of an Aryan race--Hardly a trace
     of metal--Structure of their houses--Their stone implements and
     terra-cottas coarser--Various forms of pottery--Remarkable
     _terra-cotta balls_ with astronomical and religious
     symbols--Whorls--Stone weapons--Whetstones--Hammers and instruments
     of diorite--A well belonging to this people--This third town
     destroyed with its people.

     The _fourth settlers_: comparatively savage, but still of Aryan
     race--Whorls with like emblems, but of a degenerate form--Their
     pottery inferior, but with some curious forms--Idols of
     Athena--Articles of copper--Few stones--Charred remains indicating
     wooden buildings--Stone weights, hand-mills, and knives and saws of
     flint--With this people the pre-Hellenic ages end--The stone
     buildings and painted and plain terra-cottas of _Greek
     Ilium_--Date of the Greek colony--Signs that the old inhabitants
     were not extirpated--The whorls of very coarse clay and
     patterns--Well, and jars for water and wine--Proofs of the regular
     succession of nations on the hill--Reply to the arguments of M.
     Nikolaïdes for the site at Bunarbashi--The Simoïs, Thymbrius, and
     Scamander--The tomb of Ajax at In-Tépé--Remains in it--Temple of
     Ajax and town of Aianteum--Tomb of Achilles and town of
     Achilleum--Tombs of Patroclus and Antilochus--The Greek camp--The
     tomb of Batiea or Myrina--Further discussion of the site.


On the Hill of Hissarlik, June 18th, 1872.

Since my report of the 23rd of last month I have been excavating, with
the consent of my honoured friend, Mr. Frank Calvert, on that half of
the hill which belongs to him, on condition that I share with him the
objects I may find. Here, directly beside my large platform, and at a
perpendicular depth of 40 feet below the plateau, I have laid out a
third platform about 109 feet broad, with an upper terrace 112 feet
broad, and I have seventy men digging there. Immediately beside the edge
of the steep northern declivity I found a square depression in the
ground about 112 feet long and 76 feet broad, which can only have been
caused by excavations made by the Turks hundreds of years ago, when
searching for pillars or other kinds of marble blocks suitable for
tombstones: for all of the old Turkish cemeteries in the Plain of Troy
and its vicinity, nay even as far as beyond Alexandria Troas, possess
thousands of such marble blocks, taken from ancient buildings. The
innumerable pieces of marble, which cover the whole of Mr. Frank
Calvert’s part of the plateau, leave no doubt that the field, at least
that part of it with the square depression, has been ransacked by
marble-seeking Turks.

I had scarcely begun to extend this third platform horizontally into the
hill, when I found a block of triglyphs of Parian marble, about 6½
feet long, nearly 2 feet 10 inches high, and nearly 22 inches thick at
one end, and a little over 14 inches on the other. In the middle there
is a piece of sculpture in high relief, a little above 2 feet 10 inches
long and nearly the same height, which represents Phœbus Apollo, who, in
a long woman’s robe with a girdle, is riding on the four immortal horses
which pursue their career through the universe. Nothing is to be seen of
a chariot. Above the splendid, flowing, unparted, but not long hair on
the head of the god, there is seen about two-thirds of the sun’s disc
with ten rays 2-1/3 inches long, and ten others 3½ inches long. The
face of the god is very expressive, and the folds of his long robe are
so exquisitely sculptured that they vividly remind one of the
masterpieces in the temple of Νίκη ἄπτερος in the Acropolis of Athens.
But my admiration is especially excited by the four horses, which,
snorting and looking wildly forward, career through the universe with
infinite power. Their anatomy is so accurately rendered that I frankly
confess that I have never seen such a masterly work. On the right and
left of this metopé are Doric triglyphs; there is a third triglyph on
the left side of the marble block, which is nearly 22 inches thick,
whereas the right side (14 inches thick) contains no sculpture. Above
and below the block, iron clamps are fastened by means of lead; and from
the triglyphs on the left side I presume that this metopé, together with
another sculpture which has a Doric triglyph on the right side as well,
adorned the propylæa of the temple. (_See Plate IV._, p. 32.)

It is especially remarkable to find the sun-god here, for Homer knows
nothing of a temple to the Sun in Troy, and later history does not say a
word about the existence of such a temple. However, the image of Phœbus
Apollo does not prove that the sculpture must have belonged to a temple
of the Sun; in my opinion it may just as well have served as an ornament
to any other temple.

As early as my report of the 11th of May,[150] I ventured to express
the conjecture that the image of the Sun, which I find represented here
thousands and thousands of times upon the whorls of terra-cotta, must be
regarded as the name or the emblem of the town, that is Ἴλιος. I now
venture to express the opinion, that in like manner this Sun-god shone
in the form of a woman upon the Propylæa of the temple of the Ilian
Athena as a symbol of the Sun-city (τῆς Ἰλίου). I have heard a learned
friend express the opinion that this masterpiece belonged to the period
between Pericles and Alexander the Great, because the Sun-god’s
outstretched hand is very similar to that of Phœbus Apollo on the coins
of Rhodes of the same period. But, according to Strabo (XIII. I),
Alexander the Great, on his visit to Ilium, found there a little temple
(εὐτελῆ ναόν) of the Ilian Athena; and a little temple, of course,
cannot have possessed such excellent works of plastic art. Besides this,
the head of the Sun-god appears to me to have so much of the Alexandrian
style, that I must adhere to history and believe that this work of art
belongs to the time of Lysimachus, who, according to Strabo (XIII. I),
after the death of Alexander the Great, built here the new temple of the
Ilian Athena, which Alexander had promised to the town of Ilium after
the subjugation of the Persian Empire.[151]

The discovery of this work of art upon the steep declivity of the
hill--whereas it must necessarily have stood on the opposite side above
the entrance to the temple--can only be explained by the fact that the
Turks who came here in search of monumental pillars despised this
sculpture because it represented living creatures, the imitation of
which is strictly forbidden in the Koran.

Beneath the ruins of this temple I hope to discover the remains of that
little temple which Alexander the Great found here. I do not, however,
think it likely that I shall discover in its depths the old Trojan
temple in which Hecuba caused the priestess Theano to lay her costly
robes on the knees of Athena.[152] To judge from the _débris_ of the
ashes of animal sacrifices, which is as hard as stone, and which gives
me such exceedingly great trouble along an extent of 82 feet at the
eastern end of my large platform, the area of the very ancient temple
cannot possibly be identical with the one built by Lysimachus; it must
certainly be somewhat more to the west, and must commence somewhere near
its western end.

After my report of the 23rd of last month, I began to loosen the lower
earthen wall, which is as hard as stone, by means of those immense iron
levers which I have already described. However, I was unfortunate; for,
after having worked for three hours with 40 men and with the huge levers
and windlasses in loosening an earthen wall 16 feet high, 16 broad and
10 thick, which had been already prepared by shafts and mines, only just
succeeded after the strongest chains had given way several times, when
the adjoining earth-wall fell of its own accord, and buried Georgios
Photidas and a workman who were engaged in the lower excavations,
believing that they were perfectly safe under thick logs of wood 23
inches high and 10 thick, which were covered with planks 3 inches thick.
All of us naturally thought that the two men must have been crushed
beneath the enormous mass of 100 cubic yards of stone and earth, which
had dashed the thick planks to pieces. Our fright was terrible, but
without losing a moment we set to work to rescue the unfortunate men. We
had scarcely begun when we heard them moaning beneath the weight of
earth, for the logs had only been upset, and, lying lengthwise, they
still partly supported the vault, so that the men had breathing space
left. But their release could not be effected without the greatest
danger, owing to several large gaps in the cracked earthen wall, and the
men had to be cut out. I myself cut out Georgios Photidas with my knife;
the other man was cut out by my men.

In consequence of this accident, I have decided in the first place to
cut a trench 98 feet broad at the top and 65 below, commencing at the
platform, which is to be carried along the primary soil through the
entire hill, and not to cut through the other portion of the great
platform until this is finished; for I shall then be in a position to
judge how we can best accomplish the former work. I am having the whole
length of this trench commenced at the same time on a breadth of 98
feet, and I hope thus to have it ready in two months. In digging this
trench I found that, at about 69 feet from the steep side of the hill,
the primary soil gradually rises about 2 meters (6½ feet), and as the
cutting must necessarily follow the primary soil, I have from this point
again had the _débris_ thrown upon the great platform, and have thus
formed an embankment 65½ feet broad and 6½ feet high, as far as
the steep slope.

[Illustration:

Objects of Metal from the Lowest Stratum (11-15 M.).

No. 83. A real Copper Nail.

Nos. 84, 85. Copper Dress-Pins (too long and thin for nails).

No. 86. A _gilt_ Copper Knife.

No. 87. A Silver Dress-Pin.

No. 88. A Copper Bracelet.

Nos. 89, 91. Copper Knives.

No. 90. A Silver Crescent.
]

[Illustration: Nos. 92-101. Ivory Pins, Needles, &c., from the Lowest
Stratum (11-15 M.).]

Were it not for the splendid terra-cottas which I find exclusively upon
the primary soil and as far as 6½ feet above it, I could swear that,
at a depth of from 8 meters down to exactly 10 meters (26 to 33 feet), I
am among the ruins of the Homeric Troy.[153] For at this depth I have
again found, as I found last year, a thousand wonderful objects; whereas
I find comparatively little in the lowest stratum, the removal of which
gives me such unspeakable trouble. We daily find some of the whorls of
very fine terra-cotta, and it is curious that those which have no
decorations at all, are always of the ordinary shape and size of small
tops or like the craters of volcanoes, while almost all those possessing
decorations are flat and in the form of a wheel.[154] Metals, at least
gold, silver and copper, were known to the Trojans, for I found a copper
knife highly gilded, a silver hair-pin, and a number of copper nails at
a depth of 14 meters (46 feet); and at a depth of 16 meters (52½
feet) several copper nails from 4 to 6¼ inches in length. There must
have been also copper weapons and tools for work, though I have as yet
not found any; but I found many small instruments for use as pins; also
a number of ivory needles, likewise a small ivory plate, almost the
shape of a playing-card, with six little stars or small suns, also a
curious piece of ivory covered with the same decorations, in the form of
a paper-knife, and a still more curious one in the form of an
exceedingly neat dagger.[155] The ornaments on both sides of this dagger
seem certainly to represent the Ilian Athena with the owl’s head. We
also discovered some ivory and copper rings, likewise a pair of
bracelets of copper. One-edged or double-edged knives of white silex in
the form of saws, from above 1¾ inch to nearly 2 inches in length,
were found in quantities; also many hand millstones of lava about 13
inches long, and 6-2/3 inches broad, in the form of an egg cut in half
longitudinally. All of the terra-cottas were brought out in a broken
condition; however, I have got all or almost all the pieces of a number
of vases and of several jars, so that I can restore them. I must
specially mention a large yellowish bowl 13-1/3 inches high and nearly
17 inches broad, which in addition to a handle has three large curled
ram’s horns; then a black vase with a round bottom, with two rings on
either side for hanging it up; a beautiful red vase with four handles;
also a very fine red cup: further, an exceedingly curious red vessel in
the form of two jugs with long perfectly upright beak-shaped mouths, the
two jugs being connected with each other at the bulge, as well as by a
handle; further, a brilliant black vase, 9½ inches high, with rings
on the sides for hanging it up, and a very wide neck in the form of a
chimney; the lower portion of the vase is ornamented with signs in the
form of lightning, the upper part with dots. Of a pair of brilliant
black Trojan deep plates I have so nearly all the pieces, as to be able
to put them together; these plates are very remarkable, for on two sides
at the edge they have long horizontal rings for suspension by strings;
the large dishes have such rings very large. I have the fragments of
several black double cups, but not enough of any one to restore it.

[Illustration: Nos. 102, 103. Hand Mill-stones of Lava from Lowest
Stratum (14-16 M.).]

[Illustration: No. 104. A splendid Vase with Suspension-rings, from the
Lowest Stratum (15 M.).]

[Illustration: No 105. Singular Double Vase from the lowest Stratum
(13-14 M.).]

[Illustration: No. 106. Black Vase of Terra-cotta from the lowest
Stratum (14 or 15 M.).]

[Illustration: No. 107. Funereal Urn of Stone, found on the Primary
Rock, with Human Ashes in it (15½ M.).]

Unfortunately, the tremendous weights of stone in the lowest stratum
have broken or crushed to pieces all the terra-cottas; but all the
splendid earthen vessels that I have been able to save bear witness of
wealth and art, and it is easily seen at a first glance that they were
made by a people quite distinct from the one to which the next stratum
belongs (at the depth of from 7 to 10 meters, 23 to 33 feet). I must
draw especial attention to the great similarity in the quality of the
terra-cotta of the black Trojan vessels to that of the vessels found in
the Etruscan tombs; but their forms and decorations are wholly
different. In those found here the patterns have always been engraved
upon the clay when it was still in a soft state. Most of the Trojan
terra-cottas are indestructible by moisture; some of them, however, have
become limp by damp, and I found, for instance, upon the primary soil at
a depth of 15½ meters (51 feet), in a small private burial-ground,
formed and protected by three stones 25½ inches long and 18 inches
broad, two vessels of a very remarkable form with three long feet and
filled with human ashes. The vessels had suffered so from moisture that
in spite of every care and precaution I could not get them out without
breaking them completely. I have, however, collected all the pieces of
both vessels, and shall be able to restore them. In one of them I found
among the human ashes the bones of an embryo of six months, a fact which
I can only explain by the mother’s having died in pregnancy and having
been burnt, while the bones of the embryo, being surrounded by the
membrane which enclosed it, were protected and remained uninjured. Yet
it seems wonderful that these small bones should have been preserved,
for the bones of the mother are burnt to ashes and I found only small
fragments of them. I have most carefully collected the bones of the
Trojan embryo, and shall have the little skeleton restored by a skilful
surgeon. The celebrated Doctor Aretaios, of Athens, has just written to
me that the preservation of the bones of the embryo is only possible on
the supposition that the mother had brought forth the child and then
died, that her body was burnt and the unburnt embryo was put into the
funereal urn with her ashes, where I found it.

[Illustration: No. 108. _a_, Hand Millstone of Lava (15 M.). _b_,
Brilliant black Dish with side Rings for hanging it up (14 M.).
_c_,_c_,_c_,_c_, Small decorated Rings of Terra-cotta (10-14 M.).]

[Illustration: No. 109. Rude Terra-cotta Idol (14 M.).]

In the deepest strata we also meet with simple black cups, resembling
our drinking-glasses; likewise black cups (vase-covers) with a handle
below, so that they can only stand upon their mouth. I also find on the
primary soil weights made of granite, the exact specific weights of
which I shall state in a separate table;[156] hammers and axes, as well
as a number of large and small wedges of diorite, of splendid
workmanship; sometimes also small beautifully-cut instruments in the
form of wedges, made of very beautiful transparent green stone.[157]
Besides these, we come upon quantities of round black and red
terra-cotta discs, generally nearly 2 inches in diameter, with a hole in
the centre; and stone quoits (δίσκοι), about 6 inches in diameter, with
a hole in the centre for throwing them. Further, a number of idols of
very fine marble, which form the only exception to the rule that at an
increasing depth the objects are of much better workmanship than those
above. In fact, the idols met with in the Trojan [pre-Trojan] strata of
_débris_ from 2 to 4 meters (6½ to 13 feet) above the primary soil,
that is, at a depth of from 12 to 14 meters (39¼ to 46 feet), are so
coarsely wrought, as may be seen from the drawings (on page 36), that
one might be inclined to believe that they were the very first attempts
of an uncivilized people at making plastic representations of a deity.
There was only one mutilated idol of terra-cotta found among these
ruins, a drawing of which I give; all the others are of very fine
marble. I must also mention another Priapus, of fine marble, which was
discovered at a depth of 13 meters (42½ feet).

In these depths we likewise find many bones of animals, boars’ tusks,
small shells, horns of the buffalo, ram, and stag; as well as the
vertebræ of the shark.

The houses and palaces, in which the splendid terra-cottas were used,
were large and spacious, for to them belong all those mighty heaps of
large stones hewn and unhewn, which cover them to the height of from 13
to 20 feet. These houses and palaces were easily destroyed, for the
stones were only joined with earth, and when the walls fell everything
in the houses was crushed to pieces by the immense blocks of stone. The
primitive Trojan people disappeared simultaneously with the destruction
of their town, for in none of the succeeding layers of _débris_ do we
find the style of architecture to consist of large blocks of stone
joined with earth; in none do we find the terra-cottas--with the
exception of the round articles in the form of tops and volcanoes--to
possess any resemblance with the excellent and artistic earthenware of
the people of Priam.[158]

Upon the site of the destroyed city new settlers, of a different
civilization, manners and customs, built a new town; but only the
foundation of their houses consisted of stones joined with clay; all of
the house-walls were built of unburnt bricks. Many such walls may be
seen at a depth of from 7 to 10 meters (23 to 33 feet) in the earthen
sides of my excavations; they have been preserved through the very fact
that the houses were burnt out, and the walls of unburnt bricks, through
the great heat, received a sort of brick-crust, or became actually burnt
bricks.

In my memoir of the 23rd of last month, I spoke of a stone wall, found
at a depth of 33 feet, which I hoped would extend down to the primary
soil. Unfortunately, however, it proved to be merely the foundation of a
house belonging to the immediate successors of the ancient Trojans, and
these foundations only extended to a depth of 1¾ foot.

The remains of the ruined walls belonging to ancient Troy had, of
course, to be levelled by the new settlers, whose mode of life and style
of architecture were entirely different. This explains how it is that,
with the exception of a small wall in the northern entrance of my large
trench, I have hitherto not been able to point out a single wall
belonging to ancient Troy; and that, until now, I have only been able to
present archæology with a few splendid urns, vases, pots, plates, and
dishes, and with but one bowl (_crater_). (See Cut, No. 41, p. 74.) Yet
I have found thousands of fragments of other excellent vessels, the sad
memorials of a people whose fame is immortal.

I cannot conclude the description of the lowest stratum without
mentioning that among the huge blocks of stone, at a depth of from 12 to
16 meters (39½ to 52½ feet), I found two toads; and at a depth of
39½ feet a small but very poisonous snake, with a scutiform head. The
snake may have found its way down from above; but this is an
impossibility in the case of the large toads--they must have spent 3000
years in these depths. It is very interesting to find in the ruins of
Troy living creatures from the time of Hector and Andromache, even
though these creatures are but toads.[159]

I must also draw attention to the fact that I have found the 卐 twice on
fragments of pottery, one of which was discovered at a depth of 16
meters (52½ feet), the other at 14 meters (46 feet). The primitive
Trojans, therefore, belonged to the Aryan race, which is further
sufficiently proved by the symbols on the round terra-cottas.

[Illustration: No. 110.

Fragment of Pottery, with the _Suastika_, from the lowest Stratum (14
M.).]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Nos. 111, 112. Double-handed Vases of Terra-cotta, from
the Trojan Stratum (9 M.).]

[Illustration: No. 113. A Trojan Vase in Terra-cotta of a very
remarkable form (8 M.).]

The existence of the nation which succeeded the Trojans was likewise of
a long duration, for all the layers of _débris_ at the depth of from 10
to 7 meters (33 to 23 feet) belong to it. They also were of Aryan
descent, for they possessed innumerable Aryan religious symbols. I think
I have proved that several of the symbols were common to our ancestors
at a time when Germans, Pelasgians, Hindoos, Persians, Celts, and Greeks
still formed one nation. I found no trace of a double cup among this
people, but instead of it, those curious cups (vase-covers) which have a
coronet below in place of a handle; then those brilliant red fanciful
goblets, in the form of immense champagne-glasses, with two mighty
handles on the sides: they are round below, so that they also can only
stand on their mouths. Further, those small covers, from about 4 to
4¾ inches high, with owls’ faces, with a kind of helmet on the lower
end, furnished with a high button or tuft, which is, no doubt, intended
to represent the crest of a helmet and served as a handle. This cup
likewise can only stand on its mouth.[160] Further, all those splendid
vessels of burnt earthenware--as, for instance, funereal, water, or wine
urns, 5 feet high and from 1¾ to 3¼ feet in diameter; also
smaller funereal urns, plates, dishes, and vases, of exceedingly
fanciful forms, and from about 8 to 10 inches in height, with the owl’s
face of the tutelary goddess of Troy, two female breasts, and a navel,
besides the two upraised arms on each side of the head, which served as
handles; further, all of those vessels with a beak-shaped mouth, bent
back, and either short or long. Most of these vessels are round below,
so that they cannot stand; others have three feet; others, again, are
flat-bottomed. The neck of many is so much bent backwards that it
resembles a swan or a goose. To this class also belong all of those
globular and egg-shaped vessels, small and large, with or without a neck
like a chimney, which have a short ring on either side, and a hole in
the same direction in the lip, through which was passed the string for
suspending them; many have in addition three little feet. All are of
uniform colour, either brown, yellow, red, or black; some have rows of
leaves or twigs as decorations. I also meet with very curious vases, in
the shape of animals, with three feet. The mouth of the vessel is in the
tail, which is upright and very thick, and which is connected with the
back by a handle. Upon one of these last-mentioned vases there are
decorations, consisting of three engraved stripes of three lines each. I
formerly found the Priapus only at a depth of 7 meters (23 feet); but a
short time ago I found one at a depth of 13 meters (42½ feet). I now
find it again at 8 meters (26 feet) that is, among the ruins of the
nation of which I am at present speaking. In these strata we also meet
with an immense quantity of those round terra-cottas (the whorls),
which, it is true, deviate from the wheel-shape of the articles found on
the primary soil owing to their greater thickness, and are also not of
such excellently-burnt clay as those; but, as anyone may convince
himself by examining the drawings, they are embellished with uncommonly
beautiful and ingenious symbolical signs. Among these the Sun-god always
occupies the most prominent position; but the fire-machine of our
primeval ancestors, the holy sacrificial altar with blazing flames, the
holy sôma-tree or tree of life, and the _rosa mystica_, are also very
frequently met with here. This mystic rose, which occurs very often in
the Byzantine sculptures, and the name of which, as is well known, is
employed to designate the Holy Virgin in the Roman Catholic Litanies, is
a very ancient Aryan religious symbol, as yet, unfortunately,
unexplained.[161] It is very ancient, because I find it at a depth of
from 7 to 10 meters (23 to 33 feet) in the strata of the successors to
the Trojans, which must belong to a period about 1200 years before
Christ.[162]

[Illustration: No. 114. Engraved Terra-cotta Vessel in the form of a Pig
(or Hedgehog?). 7 M.]

[Illustration: No. 115. Inscribed Whorl (7 M.).]

The sign which resembles the Phœnician letter “Nun” I found represented
sixteen times[163] upon one of those round terra-cottas from a depth of
8 meters (26 feet); for these signs stand in groups of four, and by
their position form a cross round the sun, or, if my present supposition
is right, round the nave of the wheel representing the chariot of the
sun. I also find the symbol of lightning in all the higher strata up to
10 feet below the surface. In all the strata, from a depth of 33 feet up
to 1¾ feet below the surface, I find engravings of the sun with its
rays innumerable times upon the round terra-cottas, exactly as it is
represented on the head of the Sun-god on the metopé which I discovered
when excavating the temple; but more frequently still in circles of
three, four, five, six or eight double, treble or quadruple rising suns,
and in by far the greater number of cases it stands in the centre of
four treble rising suns, which form a cross round it. Hundreds of times
I find the sun surrounded by stars in the centre of a double or treble
cross, which has a large dot on every one of the four ends. These dots
probably denote the four nails which fixed the wooden frame by which the
holy fire was prepared. At the depth of from 10 to 7 meters (33 to 23
feet) I also found although more rarely, five mystic roses in a circle
round the sun. One with signs, which may probably prove to be not merely
symbols, but actual letters, I found at a depth of 7 meters (23
feet).[164] I have still to mention those round articles from the same
depth, which have three mystic roses and two sheaves of sun-rays in the
circle round the sun. Further, from a depth of 9 meters (29½ feet) I
have several round pieces, upon which there are 14 crooked sheaves of
three sun-rays each, resembling the sails of a windmill, which radiate
in all directions from the sun, while the compartments between the
sheaves of rays are filled with stars. This representation must indicate
the rotation of the wheel in the course of the sun’s chariot in the
heavens, that is, if the supposition I before ventured to make, that the
round objects represent the wheel, is correct. Another, found at the
same depth, has on one side three holy sacrificial altars covered with
flames, and a group of stars; on the other side three similar altars,
and a suastika forming a cross round the sun.[165] There also occur some
with only four curved sheaves of rays, or two 卐 and two flaming altars
in a cross round the sun; there is again another upon which two crosses
stand opposite each other, and all the rest of the space round the sun
(or round the nave of the wheel) is filled with stars. All the whorls
met with at a depth of from 10 to 7 meters (33 to 23 feet) are made of
clay, for the most part of black or red clay, and as hard as stone,
which, in comparison with that of the whorls in the higher strata, is
distinguished by its fineness. We also find in these strata some whorls
made of lead or fine marble, but they have no decorations.

[Illustration: No. 116. Terra-cotta Seal (1 _M._).]

In the strata of the same nation I found also copper battle-axes,
lances, arrows, knives, and implements of different kinds, as well as a
number of moulds of schist and chlorite slate for casting these and many
other objects, some being of forms quite unknown to me. Seals of
terra-cotta, with crosses and other ornaments, are not peculiar to these
strata, but occur also at a depth of from 33 feet as far up as 1¾
feet below the surface. We have also brought to light hand mill-stones
of lava, which are oval on one side and flat on the other, and some also
of granite; large and small hammers, axes, and balls with a hole through
the centre; further, mortars and pestles of diorite, and weights of
granite; quoits made of granite and other kinds of stone, with a hole
through the centre for throwing them. Sling-bullets made of loadstone,
and great quantities of knives made of white or yellow silex in the form
of saws, sometimes also knives of volcanic glass and lances of diorite
are met with among the ruins of this people, but all these instruments
are much better finished than in the strata above a depth of 7 meters
(23 feet).

[Illustration: No. 117. A Trojan Hand Mill-stone of Lava (10 _M._).]

[Illustration: No. 118. A Piece of Granite, perhaps used, by means of a
wooden Handle, as an upper Mill-stone (10 _M._).]

[Illustration: No. 119. A massive Hammer of Diorite (10 _M._).]

[Illustration: No. 120. Piece of Granite, probably used as a Pestle.
From the lowest Stratum (11-16 _M._).]

I likewise find in these strata numerous idols of very fine marble, and
upon a number of them are engraved the owl’s face of the Ilian Athena
and her girdle. At a depth of 8 meters (26 feet) we discovered a
terra-cotta idol of the same tutelary goddess; four horizontal strokes
on the neck seem to denote her armour; only one of the arms has been
preserved, which is in an upright position; two lines proceeding from
the arms and crossing each other over the body give her a warlike
appearance; her breasts are indicated by two points; her long hair is
distinctly marked at the back of the head.

[Illustration: No. 121. Idol of Athena (8 M.). _a._ Front; _b._ Back.]

At a depth of 9½ meters (30½ feet) among the yellow ashes of a house
which was destroyed by fire, I found a large lump of thick wire, which I
believed to be copper wire, and therefore laid carelessly upon my table;
but when the lump was knocked down accidentally, a silver wire, which
held the packet together, broke, and out fell three bracelets, one of
which is simple, the second double, and the third treble: within the
last is a very artistic ornament and an ear-ring formed of six wires,
and these things must have been welded to the bracelet by the heat of
the conflagration, for it cannot possibly have been worn on the arm as
it is now.[166] The packet further contained a very pretty gold
ear-ring, which has three rows of little stars on both sides; then two
bunches of ear-rings of various forms, most of which are of silver and
terminate in five leaves. But the packet also contained several
ear-rings of the same form made of electrum (ἤλεκτρον): three of the
ear-rings I know positively to be of electrum; there are, however,
probably several others of electrum among the two bunches which I dare
not attempt to loosen for fear of breaking the silver ear-rings which
have suffered very much from rust.

According to Pliny (_H.N._ XXXIII. 23), and Pausanias (V. 12, §6)
electrum was an artificial compound of metals, four parts of gold and
one of silver. The most ancient Lydian coins are likewise made of
electrum.

[Illustration: Nos. 122, 123, 124. Balls of fine red Agate; from the
Trojan Stratum (9 _M._).]

At the same depth I not unfrequently find balls of serpentine or
porphyry of nearly 2 inches in diameter, and with a hole through the
centre. Besides these we find spoons made of bone or terra-cotta, and
great quantities of instruments of ivory and bone for use as pins. I
also found a very artistically carved piece of ebony, which is certainly
part of a musical stringed instrument. I must also mention having found,
not only in these depths, but also up to 6 meters (20 feet) below the
surface, round pieces of terra-cotta with a hole running longitudinally
through them, 2¾ inches long and 2-1/3 inches broad; and also pieces
of terra-cotta from 2¾ to nearly 4 inches broad, flat below and
rounded off at the top, with two holes at the edge of the broad surface,
or with only one hole above running through from the side. All of these
articles have probably served as weights. In all of the strata we
discovered a number of the vertebræ of sharks, boars’ tusks, antlers,
and great quantities of the shells of small sea-mussels, of which the
Trojans and their successors at all times must have been very fond.

[Illustration: No. 125. A curious Terra-cotta Cup (4 _M._).]

[Illustration: No. 126. Terra-cotta Pitcher of a frequent form (6
_M._).]

I now come to the strata of _débris_ at a depth of from 7 to 4 meters
(23 to 13 feet), which are evidently also the remains of a people of the
Aryan race, who took possession of the town built upon the ruins of
Troy, and who destroyed it and extirpated the inhabitants; for in these
strata of 10 feet thick I find no trace of metal beyond two nails and a
small piece of silver wire, and the structure of the houses is entirely
different. All the house-walls consist of small stones joined with clay;
in the larger buildings the stones are more or less hewn, but in the
smaller they are altogether rough. Visitors to the Plain of Troy can see
in the earthen walls of my excavations, at these depths, a number of
larger or smaller house-walls of this description. Among others are the
remains of those huge walls 6¼ feet thick, of which I spoke in my
report of the 23rd of last month. The foundations lie at a depth of 20
feet, and they extend to within 10 feet below the present surface;[167]
for as, with the exception of excavating the temple, I only intend to
make the trench through the hill 98 feet broad above, it has not been
necessary to pull down the building entirely.

[Illustration: No. 127. A small Terra-cotta Vase, with two Handles and
three feet (6 M.).]

[Illustration: No. 128. Terra-cotta Vase of a frequent form (6 _M._).]

In these strata (at a depth of from 23 to 13 feet) not only are all the
stone implements much rougher, but all the terra-cottas also are of a
coarser quality. Still it cannot be denied that with all their
simplicity they possess a certain elegance, and I must especially
mention the very pretty black or red vases in the form of hour-glasses
with two large handles, the red ones being nearly 4 inches high, the
black ones 5½ inches high; the small jars in the form of cups with
large handles, the larger jars with one or two handles; but above all
the frequently occurring covers with the owl’s face of the tutelary
goddess of Troy, which are, it is true, almost like those from a depth
of from 30 to 23 feet in size, but considerably inferior in quality.

The terra-cotta balls found in these strata are especially remarkable,
owing to their most varied symbols. I will describe two of these, found
at a depth of 5 meters (16½ feet). The surface of the one is divided
by lines into eight equal parts;[168] in one of these is a sun with ten
rays, of which only four are straight, all of the others seem to
represent religious symbols. One ray has the form of the Phœnician
letter “Nun,” and must denote lightning; another ray has the form of a
serpent; another again the form of the numeral III.; a fourth is the
shape of a sign-post; and the remaining two in the form of
fishing-hooks; beside the sun is a star. In the next division is a tree
with eight branches, a quadrangle with two stars, and a triangle with
four stars. The third field contains a tree with twelve branches; a
circle with a star; and, beside and above a stroke, twelve stars, one of
which has a dot in the centre. The twelve little stars may possibly
denote the twelve signs of the zodiac, which, being the twelve stations
of the sun, are personified in the Rigvêda by the twelve Adityas, sons
of Aditi, the indivisible and infinite space. The fourth field contains
a tree with only six branches, a triangle with three compartments, in
one of which is a stroke, and also two squares. The fifth field has
again a sun with six crooked rays and one straight ray. The sixth field
has five divisions: in the first there are five, in the second four, and
in the third seven little stars; the fourth division contains a sign
resembling the numeral II., together with three stars; in the fifth
division there is a simple cross. In the seventh field is a tree with
ten branches. In the eighth field there is a figure like a serpent, and
a star.

Upon the second terra-cotta ball there is a sun with thirteen straight
rays; further there are, between two 卐, three groups of three stars
each, and four straight lines; lastly, below the sun three similar lines
and three stars.[169] We also frequently find in these strata
terra-cotta balls completely covered with stars; likewise an immense
number of the round terra-cottas in the form of tops and volcanoes, more
than half of which are adorned with the most various symbolical signs.
We have also discovered here many weapons of diorite and hard green
stone, as well as a number of whetstones of black and green slate with
a hole at one end.[170] The use of these whetstones is not very clear to
me, for, as I have already said, in the depths of from 7 to 4 meters (23
to 13 feet) I have found no trace of any metal beyond the two nails and
the piece of silver wire. However, we came upon a few fragments of
moulds for casting instruments, and hence it is probable that copper was
known. In any case, however, it was rare and costly, for otherwise I
should not have found such colossal masses of stone instruments.

I found in these depths a large number of curious large vases, and among
them several beautiful urns with the owl’s head of the Ilian Athena, her
two female breasts, navel, and the two upraised arms beside the head.
Upon one of the navels is a cross and four holes, which are doubtless
intended to represent the four nails employed by our Aryan ancestors to
fasten the two pieces of wood which were laid crosswise for producing
the holy fire.[171] In these strata I also discovered a number of those
cups in the form of champagne-glasses with two handles, which however,
as may be seen from the drawings, become clumsier, smaller, and inferior
in quality at every yard the higher we ascend. Cups with coronets below
(vase-covers) also occur, likewise many small red jars with three feet
and two handles, and several hundreds of uncoloured jars, with a handle
from nearly 4 to 4¾ inches high. There are also enormous masses of
large clumsy hammers and other instruments of diorite; I also found a
Priapus of diorite, which is above 12½ inches high and 7¾ inches
thick.

[Illustration: No. 129.

Terra-cotta Vase of a form frequent at the depth of 3-5 M.]

There is a well belonging to this nation, built of good hewn stones
cemented with clay; its opening is at a depth of 13 feet. I have had it
cleared out almost as far as the primary soil; one wall of this well is
still to be seen on the left side of the northern entrance of my great
cutting. Hand mill-stones of lava are also found in immense numbers in
these strata.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: No. 130. Terra-cotta Vessel (4 M.).]

[Illustration: No. 131. A small Terra-cotta Vase with two Rings for
suspension (2 M.).]

[Illustration: Nos. 132, 133. Owl-faced Vase-covers (3 M.). The second
is of an unusual form.]

[Illustration: Nos. 134, 135. Two-handled Cups from the upper Stratum (2
M.).]

[Illustration: No. 136. Terra-cotta Vase (2 M.).]

[Illustration: No. 137. Perforated Terra-cotta (2 M.).]

A new epoch in the history of Ilium commenced when the accumulation of
_débris_ on this hill had reached a height of 4 meters (13 feet) below
its present surface; for the town was again destroyed, and the
inhabitants killed or driven out by a wretched tribe, which certainly
must likewise have belonged to the Aryan race, for upon the round
terra-cottas I still very frequently find the tree of life and the
simple and double cross with the four nails. In these depths, however,
the form of the whorls degenerates; they become more elongated and
pointed; I also find many in the form of cones about 1-1/5 inch to 1½
inch in height, which never occur in the lower strata; most of them are
without decorations. Of pottery much less is found, and all of it is
much more inartistic than that in the preceding strata. However, an
exceedingly fanciful goblet, found at a depth of 13 feet, deserves to be
specially mentioned; its body, which rests upon three little feet, is a
tube, out of which three small cups stand up. We still frequently meet
with cups (vase-covers) bearing the owl’s face of the Ilian Athena, and
a kind of helmet, but they continue to become more and more rude.[172]
In like manner the cups in the form of champagne-glasses continue to be
inferior in quality, they are always smaller and coarser, and are now
only about 5 inches high, whereas at a depth of 33 feet they were 12-2/3
inches high. Several vases with female breasts, navel, and upraised
arms, occur at a depth of 4 meters (13 feet), one at a depth of 2½
meters (about 8 feet). Small red vases in the form of hour-glasses with
a handle are still frequently met with; two were found at as small a
depth as 2 meters (6½ feet). A very great number of small ordinary
jars were found at a depth of 4 and 3 meters (13 to 9¾ feet), but
they almost entirely cease to be found at 2 meters (6½ feet) below
the surface. At the depths of 4, 3, and even 2½ meters (13, 9¾,
and 8 feet) I also found very many idols of the Ilian Athena, made of
fine marble; upon several there are engravings of her owl’s head and
girdle.

[Illustration: Nos. 138, 139. Deep Plates (_pateræ_) with Rings for
suspension, placed (_a_) vertically or (_b_) horizontally (1 and 2 M.).]

[Illustration:

No. 140. _a._ Front.   No. 140. _b._ Back.   No. 141.

Idols of the Ilian Athena (3 M.).]

At a depth of 3 meters (10 feet) I also found a terra-cotta idol, which
represents this same goddess with the owl’s face and two enormous eyes;
she has two female breasts and long hair hanging down behind. Three
horizontal lines on the neck seem to denote armour. At the same depth I
also found a small and splendid sacrificial basin of terra-cotta, with
three feet; in the basin there are engraved a suastika, a tree with
twenty-four branches, and a caterpillar.[173]

Copper was known to this people, for I discovered here knives, lances,
and nails made of this metal. The form of the nails is often curious,
for occasionally I find them with two heads, one beside the other,
sometimes with no head at all, but merely two pointed ends, so that a
kind of head had to be made by bending over about 2/5 of an inch at one
of the ends. Another proof of their knowledge of metals is furnished by
the moulds in mica-schist.

We find scarcely any stones in these strata, and the masses of charred
ruins and wood-ashes leave no doubt that all the buildings of this tribe
were made of wood. I find in these strata of 6½ feet thick some few
stone weights, also a couple of hand-mills of lava, but otherwise no
implements of stone except knives of silex in the form of saws, which
seem often to have been made with great care. Thus, for instance, at a
depth of 6½ feet I found a saw made of silex 4¾ inches in length
and 1·3 in breadth, which was so exquisitely made that I at first
thought it must be a comb. The upper portion of the saw bore the
clearest marks of having been encased in wood.

[Illustration: No. 142. Mould in Mica-schist for casting some unknown
object (2½ M.).]

       *       *       *       *       *

With the people to whom these strata belonged--from 4 to 2 meters (13 to
6½ feet) below the surface--the pre-Hellenic ages end, for
henceforward we see many ruined walls of Greek buildings, of beautifully
hewn stones laid together without cement, and in the uppermost layer of
all even the ruins of house-walls, in which the stones are joined with
lime or cement. Moreover, the painted and unpainted terra-cottas,
occasionally found at a depth of 2 meters (6½ feet), leave no doubt
that a Greek colony took possession of Ilium when the surface of this
hill was still that much lower than it is now. It is impossible to
determine exactly when this new colonization took place, but it must
certainly have been much earlier than the visit of Xerxes reported by
Herodotus (VII. 43), which took place 480 years before Christ. According
to Strabo (XIII. 1. 42) the town was built under Lydian dominion, and
hence this event may have taken place about 700 B.C., for the
commencement of the Lydian dominion is assigned to the year 797 B.C.
Fluted jars, which archæologists believe to belong to a period 200 years
anterior to Christ, are found immediately below the surface, at a depth
of from 1¾ to 3¼ feet. The Greek colony does not appear by any
means to have at all extirpated the inhabitants of Ilium, for I still
find a great deal of pre-Hellenic pottery at a depth of 6½ and even
of 5 feet. At all events those round lamp-shaped terra-cottas with a
potter’s stamp and two holes at the edge, found as far down as 6½
feet, seem to me to be of Greek manufacture. The round articles with one
hole through the centre, without or with decorations representing the
sun and its rays, or the sun with stars, or four double or treble rising
suns forming a cross, or even the sun in the centre of a simple or
double cross, occur in numbers as far up as a depth of 3¼ feet; but
in these uppermost strata the quality of the clay of which these
articles are made is very bad, and the symbolical signs are very
coarsely and inartistically engraved. My wife, who is enthusiastic about
the discovery of Ilium, and who helps me assiduously in the excavations,
found, in a cutting which she and her maid had opened close to our
house, the same round terra-cottas, with or without decorations, even
quite close to the surface. How these exceedingly remarkable objects,
which are adorned with the most ancient religious symbols of the Aryan
race, can have continued to be used for more than 1000 years by the
four tribes which successively held possession of Ilium, and even by the
civilized Greek colony, is to me a problem as inexplicable as the
purpose for which they were used. If, as I now conjecture, they
represent the wheel, which in the Rigvêda is the symbol of the sun’s
chariot, they were probably used as _Ex votos_, or they were worshipped
as idols of the sun-god, Phœbus Apollo. But why are there such enormous
numbers of them?

The well, which I last year discovered at a depth of 6½ feet, built
of hewn stones with cement, belongs of course to the Greek colony; so
also do all those enormous water and wine urns (πίθοι), which I met with
in the uppermost strata. I find all of these colossal urns, as well as
all those met with in the deeper strata, standing upright, which is the
best proof, if indeed any were needed, that the mighty masses of
_débris_ cannot have been brought here from another place, but that they
were formed gradually in the course of thousands of years, and that the
conquerors and destroyers of Ilium, or at least the new settlers after
its conquest and destruction, never had the same manners and customs as
their predecessors. Consequently, for many centuries, houses with walls
built of unburnt bricks stood upon the mighty heaps of stone, from 13 to
20 feet thick, belonging to the enormous buildings of the primitive
Trojans; again, for centuries, houses built of stones joined with clay
were erected upon the ruins of houses of brick; for another long period,
upon the ruins of these stone houses, wooden houses were erected; and
lastly, upon the charred ruins of the latter were established the
buildings of the Greek colony, which at first consisted of large hewn
stones joined with clay or cement. It can thus no longer seem
astonishing that these masses of ruins, covering the primary soil, have
a thickness of from 14 to 16 meters (46 to 52½ feet) at the least.

I take this opportunity of giving a translation of the answer I made to
an article published by M. G. Nikolaïdes in No. 181 of the Greek
newspaper ‘Ἐφημερὶς Συζητήσεων,’ in which the author endeavours to prove
that I am giving myself unnecessary trouble, and that the site of Troy
is not to be found here, but on the heights of Bunarbashi.[174]

“M. Nikolaïdes maintains that the site of Troy cannot be discovered by
means of excavations or other proofs, but solely from the Iliad. He is
right, if he supposes that Ilium is only a picture of Homer’s
imagination, as the City of the Birds was but a fancy of Aristophanes.
If, however, he believes that a Troy actually existed, then his
assertion appears most strange. He thereupon says that Troy was situated
on the heights of Bunarbashi, for that at the foot of them are the two
springs beside which Hector was killed. This is, however, a great
mistake, for the number of springs there is forty, and not two, which is
sufficiently clear from the Turkish name of the district of the springs,
‘Kirkgiös’ (40 eyes or springs). My excavations in 1868, on the heights
of Bunarbashi, which I everywhere opened down to the primary soil, also
suffice to prove that no village, much less a town, has ever stood
there. This is further shown by the shape of the rocks, sometimes
pointed, sometimes steep, and in all cases very irregular. At the end of
the heights, at a distance of 11½ miles from the Hellespont, there
are, it is true, the ruins of a small town, but its area is so very
insignificant, that it cannot possibly have possessed more than 2000
inhabitants, whereas, according to the indications of the Iliad, the
Homeric Ilium must have had over 50,000. In addition to this, the small
town is four hours distant, and the 40 springs are 3½ hours distant,
from the Hellespont; and such distances entirely contradict the
statements of the Iliad, according to which the Greeks forced their way
fighting, four times in one day, across the land which lay between the
naval camp and the walls of Troy.

“M. Nikolaïdes’s map of the Plain of Troy may give rise to errors; for
he applies the name of Simoïs to the river which flows through the
south-eastern portion of the Plain, whereas this river is the Thymbrius,
as Mr. Frank Calvert has proved. In his excavations on the banks of that
river, Mr. Calvert found the ruins of the temple of the Thymbrian
Apollo, about which there cannot be the slightest doubt, owing to the
long inscription which contains the inventory of the temple. Then on the
map of M. Nikolaïdes I find no indication whatever of the much larger
river Doumbrek-Su, which flows through the north-eastern portion of the
Plain of Troy, and passed close by the ancient town of Ophrynium, near
which was Hector’s tomb and a grove dedicated to him.[175] Throughout
all antiquity, this river was called the Simoïs, as is also proved by
Virgil (_Æn._ III. 302, 305). The map of M. Nikolaïdes equally ignores
the river which flows from south to north through the Plain, the
Kalifatli-Asmak, with its enormously broad bed, which must certainly at
one time have been occupied by the Scamander, and into which the Simoïs
still flows to the north of Ilium. The Scamander has altered its course
several times, as is proved by the three large river-beds between it and
the bed of the Kalifatli-Asmak. But even these three ancient river-beds
are not given in the map of M. Nikolaïdes.

“In complete opposition to all the traditions of antiquity, the map
recognises the tomb of Achilles in the conical sepulchral mound of
In-Tépé, which stands on a hill at the foot of the promontory of
Rhœteum, and which, from time immemorial, has been regarded as the tomb
of Ajax. During an excavation of this hill, in 1788, an arched passage
was found, about 3¾ feet high, and built of bricks; as well as the
ruins of a small temple. According to Strabo (XIII. 1. p. 103), the
temple contained the statue of Ajax, which Mark Antony took away and
presented to Cleopatra. Augustus gave it back to the inhabitants of the
town of Rhœteum, which was situated near the tomb. According to
Philostratus (_Heroica_, I.), the temple, which stood over the grave,
was repaired by the Emperor Hadrian, and according to Pliny (_H. N._, V.
33), the town of Aianteum was at one time situated close to the tomb. On
the other hand, throughout antiquity, the tomb of Achilles was believed
to be the sepulchral mound on an elevation at the foot of the promontory
of Sigeum, close to the Hellespont, and its position corresponds
perfectly with Homer’s description.[176]

[Illustration:

PLATE VII.

A.--MOUND OF IN-TÉPÉ,

The traditional Tomb of Ajax, with the Ruins of his Temple.

B.--MOUND CALLED THE TOMB OF ACHILLES.

_Page 178._
]

“The field situated directly south of this tomb, and which is covered
with fragments of pottery, is doubtless the site of the ancient town of
Achilleum, which, according to Strabo (XIII. 1. p. 110), was built by
the Mitylenæans, who were for many years at war with the Athenians,
while the latter held Sigeum, and which was destroyed simultaneously
with Sigeum by the people of Ilium. Pliny (_H. N._, V. 33) confirms the
disappearance of Achilleum. The Ilians here brought offerings to the
dead, not only on the tomb of Achilles, but also upon the neighbouring
tombs of Patroclus and Antilochus.[177] Alexander the Great offered
sacrifices here in the temple of Achilles.[178] Caracalla also,
accompanied by his army, offered sacrifices to the manes of Achilles,
and held games around the tomb.[179] Homer never says anything about a
river in the Greek camp, which probably extended along the whole shore
between Cape Sigeum and the Scamander, which at that time occupied the
ancient bed of the Kalifatli-Asmak. But the latter, below the village of
Kumköi, is at all events identical with the large bed of the small
stream In-tépé-Asmak, which flows into the Hellespont near Cape Rhœteum.

“M. Nikolaïdes further quotes the following lines from the Iliad (II.
811-815):--

    Ἔστι δέ τις προπάροιθε πόλιος αἰπεῖα κολώνη,
    Ἐν πεδίῳ ἀπάνευθε, περίδρομος ἔνθα καὶ ἔνθα,
    Τὴν ἤτοι ἄνδρες Βατίειαν κικλήσκουσιν,
    Ἀθάνατοι δέ τε σῆμα πολυσκάρθμοιο Μυρίνης.
    Ἔνθα τότε Τρῶές τε διέκριθεν ἠδ’ ἐπίκουροι.

    ‘Before the city stands a lofty mound,
    Each way encircled by the open plain;
    Men call it Batiea; but the Gods
    The tomb of swift Myrina; mustered there
    The Trojans and Allies their troops arrayed.’

M. Nikolaïdes gathers from this, that in front of Ilium there was a very
high hill, upon which the Trojan army of 50,000 men were marshalled in
battle-array. I, however, do not interpret the above lines by supposing
that the mound of Batiea was large and spacious, nor that 50,000 were
marshalled upon it in battle-array. On the contrary, when Homer uses the
word ‘αἰπύς’ for height, he always means ‘steep and lofty,’ and upon a
steep and lofty height 50,000 Trojans could not possibly have been
marshalled. Moreover, the poet expressly says that the steep hill is
called by the gods the tomb of the nimble-limbed Myrina, while
‘Batiea,’ the name which men gave the hill, can signify only ‘the tomb
of Batiea.’ For, according to Apollodorus (iii. 12), Batiea was the
daughter of the Trojan King Teucer, and married Dardanus, who had
immigrated from Samothrace, and who eventually became the founder of
Troy.[180] Myrina was one of the Amazons who had undertaken the campaign
against Troy.[181] Homer can never have wished us to believe that 50,000
warriors were marshalled upon a steep and lofty tumulus, upon whose
summit scarcely ten men could stand; he only wished to indicate the
locality where the Trojan army was assembled; they were therefore
marshalled round or beside the tumulus.

“M. Nikolaïdes goes on to say, that such a hill still exists in front of
Bunarbashi, whereas there is no hill whatever, not even a mound, before
Ilium Novum. My answer to this is that in front of the heights of
Bunarbashi there are none of those conical tumuli called ‘σήματα’ by
Homer, that however there must have been one in front of Hissarlik,
where I am digging, but it has disappeared, as do all earthen mounds
when they are brought under the plough.[182] Thus, for instance, M.
Nikolaïdes, during his one day’s residence in the Plain of Troy in the
year 1867, still found the tumulus of Antilochus near the Scamander, for
he speaks of it in his work published in the same year. I, too, saw the
same tumulus in August, 1868, but even then it had considerably
decreased in size, for it had just begun to be ploughed over, and now it
has long since disappeared.

“M. Nikolaïdes says that I am excavating in New Ilium. My answer is that
the city, whose depths I am investigating, was throughout antiquity, nay
from the time of its foundation to that of its destruction, always
simply called Ilium, and that no one ever called it New Ilium, for
everyone believed that the city stood on the site of the Homeric Ilium,
and that it was identical with it. The only person who ever doubted its
identity with Ilium, the city of Priam, was Demetrius of Scepsis, who
maintained that the famous old city had stood on the site of the village
of the Ilians (Ἰλιέων κώμη), which lies 30 stadia (3 geog. miles) to the
south-east. This opinion was afterwards shared by Strabo, who however,
as he himself admits, had never visited the Plain of Troy; hence he too
calls the town ‘τὸ σημερινὸν Ἴλιον,’ to distinguish it from the Homeric
Ilium. My last year’s excavations on the site of the Ἰλιέων κώμη have,
however, proved that the continuous elevation on one side of it, which
appeared to contain the ruins of great town walls, contains in reality
nothing but mere earth. Wherever I investigated the site of the ancient
village, I always found the primary soil at a very inconsiderable depth,
and nowhere the slightest trace of a town ever having stood there. Hence
Demetrius of Scepsis and Strabo, who adopted his theory, were greatly
mistaken. The town of Ilium was only named Ilium Novum about 1000 years
after its complete destruction; in fact this name was only given to it
in the year 1788 by Lechevalier, the author of the theory that the
Homeric Ilium stood on the heights of Bunarbashi. Unfortunately,
however, as his work and map of the Plain of Troy prove, Lechevalier
only knew of the town from hearsay; he had never taken the trouble to
come here himself, and hence he has committed the exceedingly ludicrous
mistake, in his map, of placing his New Ilium 4¼ miles from
Hissarlik, on the other side of the Scamander, near Kum-kaleh.

“I wonder where M. Nikolaïdes obtained the information that the city
which he calls Ilium Novum was founded by Astypalæus in the sixth
century B.C. It seems that he simply read in Strabo (XIII. 602), that
the Astypalæans, living in Rhœteum, built on the Simoïs the town of
Polion (which name passed over into Polisma), which, as it had no
natural fortifications, was soon destroyed, and that he has changed this
statement of Strabo’s by making the Astypalæans build Ilium Novum in the
sixth century B.C. In the following sentence Strabo says that the town
(Ilium) arose under the dominion of the Lydians, which began in 797 B.C.
Whence can M. Nikolaïdes have obtained the information that the
foundation of the town was made in the sixth century?

“M. Nikolaïdes further says that Homer certainly saw the successors of
Æneas ruling in Troy, else he could not have put the prophecy of that
dynasty into the mouth of Poseidon.[183] I also entertained the same
opinion, until my excavations proved it to be erroneous, and showed
undoubtedly that Troy was completely destroyed, and rebuilt by another
people.

“As a further proof that the site of the Homeric Ilium was on the
heights of Bunarbashi, M. Nikolaïdes says that the Trojans placed a
scout on the tumulus of Æsyetes, to watch when the Achæans would march
forth from their ships, and he thinks that, on account of the short
distance from the Hellespont, this watching would have been superfluous
and unreasonable if, as I say, Troy had stood on the site of Ilium,
which M. Nikolaïdes calls Ilium Novum. I am astonished at this remark of
M. Nikolaïdes, for, as he can see from his own map of the Plain of Troy,
the distance from hence to the Hellespont is nearly four miles, or 1½
hour’s walk, whereas no human eye can recognise men at a distance of 1
mile, much less at a distance of four. M. Nikolaïdes, however, believes
the tumulus of Æsyetes to be the mound called Udjek-Tépé, which is 8
miles or 3½ hours’ journey from the Hellespont. But at such a
distance the human eye could scarcely see the largest ships, and could
in no case recognise men.

“In like manner, the assertion of M. Nikolaïdes, that there is no spring
whatever near Hissarlik, is utterly wrong. It would be unfortunate for
me if this were true, for I have constantly to provide my 130 workmen
with fresh water to drink; but, thank God, close to my excavations,
immediately below the ruins of the town-wall, there are two beautiful
springs, one of which is even a double one. M. Nikolaïdes is also wrong
in his assertion that the Scamander does not flow, and never has flowed,
between Hissarlik and the Hellespont; for, as already stated, the
Scamander must at one time have occupied the large and splendid bed of
the Kalifatli-Asmak, which runs into the Hellespont near Cape Rhœteum,
and which is not given in the map of M. Nikolaïdes.

“Lastly, he is completely wrong in his statement that the hill of
Hissarlik, where I am digging, lies at the extreme north-eastern end of
the Plain of Troy; for, as everyone may see by a glance at the map, the
Plain extends still further to the north-east an hour and a half in
length and half an hour in breadth, and only ends at the foot of the
heights of Renkoï and the ancient city of Ophrynium.

“It will be easily understood that, being engaged with my superhuman
works, I have not a moment to spare, and therefore I cannot waste my
precious time with idle talk. I beg M. Nikolaïdes to come to Troy, and
to convince himself with his own eyes that, in refuting his erroneous
statements, I have described all I see here before me with the most
perfect truth.”




CHAPTER XI.

     Increase of men and machinery and cost on the works: but slow
     progress--Continued hurricane on “the windy Ilium” (Ἴλιος
     ἠνεμόεσσα)--The great platform proves too high--New
     cutting--Excavation of the temple--Objects found--Greek statuettes
     in terra-cotta--Many whorls with 卐 and suns--Wheel-shaped whorls
     with simple patterns in the lowest strata--Terra-cotta balls with
     suns and stars--Use of the whorls as amulets or coins
     discussed--Little bowls, probably lamps--Other articles of
     pottery--Funnels--A terra-cotta bell--Various beautiful
     terra-cottas--Attempts at forgery by the workmen--Mode of naming
     the men--The springs in front of Ilium--Question of Homer’s hot and
     cold spring--Course of the Simoïs--The tomb of Batiea or Myrina
     identified with the Pacha Tépé--Theatre of Lysimachus--Heat and
     wind--Plague of insects and scorpions--Konstantinos Kolobos, a
     native genius without feet.


On the Hill of Hissarlik, July 13th, 1872.

My last report was dated the 18th of June. As the great extent of my
excavations renders it necessary for me to work with no less than 120
men, I have already been obliged, on account of the harvest season, to
increase the daily wages to 12 piasters since the 1st of June; but even
this would not have enabled me to collect the requisite number of men,
had not Mr. Max Müller, the German Consul in Gallipoli, had the kindness
to send me 40 workmen from that place. In consequence of this, even
during the busiest harvest season, I have always had from 120 to 130
workmen, and now that the harvest is over, I have constantly 150. To
facilitate the works, I have procured, through the kindness of the
English Consul in Constantinople, Mr. Charles Cookson, 10 “man-carts,”
which are drawn by two men and pushed by a third. The same gentleman
also sent me 20 wheel-barrows, so that I now work with 10 man-carts and
88 wheel-barrows. In addition to these I keep six more carts with
horses, each of which costs 5 francs a day, so that the total cost of my
excavations amounts to more than 400 francs (16_l._) a day. Besides
battering-rams, chains, and windlasses, my implements consist of 24
large iron levers, 108 spades, and 103 pickaxes, all of the best English
manufacture. From sunrise to sunset all are busily at work, for I have
three capital foremen, and my wife and I are always present at the
works. But for all this I do not think that I now remove more than 400
cubic yards of _débris_ in a day, for the distance is always increasing,
and in several places it is already more than 262 feet. Besides this,
the continual hurricane from the north, which drives the dust into our
eyes and blinds us, is exceedingly disturbing. This perpetual high wind
is perhaps explained by the fact that the Sea of Marmora, with the Black
Sea behind it, is connected with the Ægean Sea by a strait comparatively
so narrow. Now, as such perpetual high winds are unknown in any other
part of the world, Homer must have lived in the Plain of Troy, otherwise
he would not have so often given to his Ἴλιος the appropriate epithet of
“ἠνεμόεσσα” (the “windy” or “stormy”), which he gives to no other place.

As I have already said, at a perpendicular depth of 12 meters (39½
feet) below the summit of the hill (on the site of what is probably the
temple built by Lysimachus) I have dug a platform, 102 feet broad below
and 112 feet wide at the top: it already extends to a length of 82 feet.
But to my great alarm I find that I have made it at least 5 meters
(16½ feet) too high; for, in spite of the great depth and the great
distance from the declivity of the hill, I am here still in the _débris_
of the Greek colony, whereas on the northern declivity of the hill I
generally reached the ruins of the preceding people at a depth of less
than 6½ feet. To make the whole platform 16½ feet lower would be a
gigantic piece of work, for which I have no patience at present, on
account of the advanced season of the year. But in order as soon as
possible to find out what lies hidden in the depths of this temple, I
have contented myself with making a cutting 26 feet broad above and 13
feet wide below, exactly 16¼ feet below the platform and in the
centre of it. This cutting I am having dug out at the same time from
below and on two terraces, so it advances rapidly.

Since the discovery of the Sun-god with the four horses, many blocks of
marble with representations of suns and flowers have been found, but no
sculptures of any importance. As yet very few other objects have been
brought to light from the excavation of the temple; only a few round
terra-cottas with the usual decoration of the central sun surrounded by
three, four, or five triple or quadruple rising suns; knives of silex in
the form of saws, a few pretty figures in terra-cotta, among which is a
priestess with very expressive Assyrian features, with a dress of a
brilliant red and green colour, and a red cloth round her head; also a
small bowl, the lower end of which represents the head of a mouse. The
mouse, it is well known, is a creature inspired by the vapours of the
earth, and, as the symbol of wisdom, was sacred to Apollo. According to
Strabo (XIII. p. 613) Apollo is said to have caused mice to show the
Teucrians, who migrated from Crete, the place where they were to settle.
However, the bowl with the head of a mouse is no more a proof that the
temple built here by Lysimachus was dedicated to Apollo than is the
metopé representing the Sun-god with four horses.

In the other parts of my excavations, since my last report, we have
again brought to light an immense number of round terra-cottas, and
among them, from a depth of from 4 to 10 meters (13 to 33 feet), a
remarkable number with three, four, or five 卐 round the central
sun.[184] One, from a depth of 23 feet,[185] shows the central sun
surrounded by six suns, through each of which a 卐 passes; upon another,
found at a depth of 33 feet, the central sun has 12 trees instead of
rays;[186] upon a third, brought from a depth of 16½ feet, the sun
has seven rays in the form of fishing-hooks, one in the form of the
figure three and two in the shape of the Phœnician letter Nun, then
follow 12 sheaves of rays, in each of which are four little stars; upon
a fourth terra-cotta, which I found at a depth of 16½ feet, there are
four rising suns and a tree in the circle round the sun.[187] I very
frequently find between the rising suns three or four rows of three dots
running towards the central sun,[188] which, as already said, according
to É. Burnouf, denote “royal majesty” in the Persian cuneiform
inscriptions. It is certain that this symbol is here also intended to
glorify the Sun-god. At a depth of from 7 to 10 meters (23 to 33 feet)
we also find round terra-cottas, upon which the entire surface round the
sun is filled with little stars, and in addition only one 卐.

During the last few days we have also found, in the strata next above
the primary soil, at a depth of from 46 to 36 feet, a number of round
brilliant black terra-cottas of exquisite workmanship; most of them much
flatter than those occurring in the higher strata, and resembling a
wheel; many are in the shape of large flat buttons.[189] But we also
meet with some in the form of tops and volcanoes, which differ from
those found in the higher strata only by the fineness of the terra-cotta
and by their better workmanship. The decorations on these very ancient
articles are, however, generally much simpler than those met with above
a depth of 10 meters (33 feet), and are mostly confined to the
representation of the sun with its rays, or with stars between the
latter, or of the sun in the centre of a simple cross, or in the middle
of four or five double or treble rising suns. At a depth of 6 meters (20
feet) we again found a round terra-cotta in the form of a volcano, upon
which are engraved three antelopes in the circle round the sun.

At a depth of from 5 to 8 meters (16½ to 26 feet) a number of
terra-cotta balls were found, the surface of each being divided into
eight fields; these contain a great many small suns and stars, either
enclosed by circles or standing alone. Most of the balls, however, are
without divisions and covered with stars; upon some I find the 卐 and the
tree of life, which, as already said, upon a terra-cotta ball found at a
depth of 26 feet, had stars between its branches.

[Illustration: No. 143. Terra-cotta Ball, representing apparently the
climates of the globe (8 M.).[190]]

Among the thousands and thousands of round terra-cottas in the form of
the volcano, the top, or the wheel, which are found here from the
surface down to a depth of from 14 and 16 meters (46 to 53 feet)--that
is, from the end of the Greek colony down to the ruined strata of the
first inhabitants, I have not yet found a single one with symbolical
signs, upon which I could discover the slightest trace that it had been
used for any domestic purpose.[191] On the other hand, among those which
have no decorations I find a few, perhaps two in a hundred, of those in
the form of volcanoes, the upper surfaces of which show distinct traces
of rubbing, as if from having been used on the spinning-wheel or loom.
That these articles, which are frequently covered with the finest and
most artistic engravings, should have served as weights for
fishing-nets, is utterly inconceivable, for, apart from all other
reasons opposed to such a supposition, pieces of terra-cotta have not
the requisite weight, and of course are directly spoilt by being used in
water.

M. É. Burnouf writes to me, that these exceedingly remarkable objects
were either worn by the Trojans and their successors as amulets, or must
have been used as coins. Both of these suppositions, however, seem to me
to be impossible. For amulets they are much too large and heavy, for
they are from above 1 inch to nearly 2 inches, and some even 2-1/3
inches, in diameter, and from 3/5 of an inch to nearly 2 inches high;
moreover, it would be most uncomfortable to wear even a single one of
these heavy pieces on the neck or breast. That they were used as coins
appears to me inconceivable, on account of the religious symbols;
moreover, if they had been so used, they would show traces of wear from
their continual transfer. The white substance with which the engravings
are filled seems also to contradict their having been used as coins; for
in their constant passage from hand to hand it would have soon
disappeared. Lastly, such an use is inconsistent with the fact that
they also occur in the strata of the Greek colony, in which I find a
number of copper and some silver coins of Ilium. However, the latter
belong for the most part to the time of the Roman emperors, and I cannot
say with certainty that they reach back beyond our Christian era. There
are, however, coins of Sigeum, which probably belong to the second
century before Christ, for in Strabo’s time this town was already
destroyed.

[Illustration: No. 144. Small Terra-cotta Vessel from the lowest
Stratum, with four perforated feet, and one foot in the middle (14
M.).[192]]

At a depth of 14 meters (46 feet) I find, among other curious objects,
small round bowls only 1¾ inch in diameter; some of them have, on the
edge of the bottom, four little feet with a perforated hole, and in the
centre a fifth little foot without a hole. Other bowls of the same size
have four little feet, only two of which have a perforated hole. My
conjecture is that all of these small bowls, which could both stand and
be hung up, were used by the ancient Trojans as lamps. Among the ruins
of the three succeeding nations I find no trace of lamps, and only at a
depth of less than a meter (3¼ feet) do I find Greek λύχνοι.

[Illustration: Nos. 145, 146. Two little Funnels of Terra-cotta,
inscribed with Cyprian Letters (3 M.).]

At the depth of 2 meters (6½ feet) I found, among the ruins of a
house, a great quantity of very small bowls, only 3-4ths of an inch high
and 2-5ths of an inch broad, together with their small lids; their use
is unknown to me. At all depths below 4 meters (13 feet) I find the
small flat saucers of from nearly 2 inches to above 3 inches in
diameter, with two holes opposite each other; from 4 to 7 meters (13 to
23 feet) they are coarse, but from 7 to 10 meters (23 to 33 feet) they
are finer, and from 13 to 14 meters (42½ to 46 feet) they are very
fine. I am completely ignorant as to what they can have been used for.
At all these depths I also find funnels from 2¾ to above 3 inches
long, the broad end of which is only a little above an inch in diameter.
In the upper strata they are made of very coarse clay, but at an
increasing depth they gradually become better, and at a depth of 46 feet
they are made of very good terra-cotta. It is extremely remarkable,
however, that these curious and very “unpractical” funnels were kept in
use in an entirely unchanged pattern by all the tribes which inhabited
Ilium from the foundation of the city to before the Greek colony. I also
find, in the second and third strata, terra-cottas in the form of the
primitive canoes which were made of the hollowed trunk of a tree. From 4
to 7 meters (13 to 23 feet) they are coarse, and about 4 inches long; at
a depth of from 7 to 10 meters (23 to 33 feet) they are finer, and from
1½ to 2¾ inches long. They may have been used as salt-cellars or
pepper-boxes; I found several with flat lids. These vessels cease to be
found in the lowest stratum. Miniature vases and pots, between 1 and 2
inches high, are frequently found in all the strata from a depth of from
10 to 33 feet; at a depth of from 46 to 52½ feet only three miniature
pots were discovered; one is not quite an inch high. At a depth of 5
meters (16½ feet) we found a perfectly closed earthen vessel with a
handle, which seems to have been used as a bell, for there are pieces of
metal inside of it which ring when it is shaken.

[Illustration: No. 147. A Trojan Humming-top (7 M.).]

[Illustration: No. 148. Terra-cotta Bell, or Clapper, or Rattle (5 M., 7
in the Photograph).]

Of cups (vase-covers) with owls’ heads and helmets, since my last report
two have been brought out from a depth of 10 and 11 feet, two from 16
feet and one from 26 feet. The first are made of bad terra-cotta and are
inartistic; those from a depth of 16 feet are much better finished and
of a better clay; while that from 26 feet (8 meters) is so beautiful,
that one is inclined to say that it represents the actual portrait of
the goddess with the owl’s face.[193] During these last few days we have
found a number of those splendid red cups in the form of large
champagne-glasses, without a foot, but with two enormous handles, one of
which was 10½ inches high; but I have already found one 12½ inches
in height. From a depth of from 26 to 33 feet we have also brought out
many small pots with three little feet, with rings at the sides and
holes in the mouth for hanging up, and with pretty engraved decorations.
Upon the whole, we have met with many beautiful terra-cottas from all
the strata during the last few days.

I have still to describe one of those very pretty vases which occur
abundantly at the depth of from 7 to 10 meters (23 to 33 feet), and have
either two closed handles, or, in place of them, two handles with
perforated holes, and also two holes in the mouth in the same direction;
thus they could stand or be hung up by means of strings drawn through
the four holes. They have in most cases decorations all round them,
which generally consist, above and below, of three parallel lines drawn
round them horizontally; between these there are 24 perpendicular lines,
which likewise run parallel; the spaces formed by the latter are filled
alternately with three or six little stars.[194] At a depth of from 7 to
10 meters (23 to 33 feet) we also meet, although seldom, with vases
having cuneiform decorations. I must, however, remind the reader that
all the decorations met with here, at a depth of from 33 feet up to
6½ feet, have always been more or less artistically engraved upon the
terra-cottas when they were still soft and unburnt, that all of the
vases have a uniform colour (though the ordinary pots are in most cases
uncoloured), and that we have never found a trace of painting in these
depths, with the exception of a curious box in the form of a band-box,
found at a depth of 8 meters (26 feet), which has three feet as well as
holes for hanging it up. It is adorned on all sides with red decorations
on a yellow ground, and on its lid there is a large 卐 or a very similar
symbol of the Maya, the fire-machine of our Aryan forefathers.

In the lowest stratum also, at the depth of 52½ feet, I found only
the one fragment, already described, of a vase with an actual
painting.[195] All of the other vessels found in these strata, even the
round terra-cottas in the form of wheels, volcanoes, or tops, are of a
brilliant black, red or brown colour, and the decorations are
artistically engraved and filled with a white substance, so as to be
more striking to the eye.

As every object belonging to the dark night of the pre-Hellenic times,
and bearing traces of human skill in art, is to me a page of history, I
am, above all things, obliged to take care that nothing escapes me. I
therefore pay my workmen a reward of 10 paras (5 centimes, or a
half-penny) for every object that is of the slightest value to me; for
instance, for every round terra-cotta with religious symbols. And,
incredible as it may seem, in spite of the enormous quantities of these
articles that are discovered, my workmen have occasionally attempted to
make decorations on the unornamented articles, in order to obtain the
reward; the sun with its rays is the special object of their industry.
I, of course, detect the forged symbols at once, and always punish the
forger by deducting 2 piasters from his day’s wages; but, owing to the
constant change of workmen, forgery is still attempted from time to
time.

As I cannot remember the names of the men engaged in my numerous works,
I give each a name of my own invention according to their more or less
pious, military or learned appearance: dervish, monk, pilgrim, corporal,
doctor, schoolmaster, and so forth. As soon as I have given a man such a
name, the good fellow is called so by all as long as he is with me. I
have accordingly a number of Doctors, not one of whom can either read or
write.

Yesterday, at a depth of 13 meters (43½ feet), between the stones of
the oldest city, I again came upon two toads, which hopped off as soon
as they found themselves free.

In my last report I did not state the exact number of springs in front
of Ilium. I have now visited all the springs myself, and measured their
distance from my excavations, and I can give the following account of
them. The first spring, which is situated directly below the ruins of
the ancient town-wall, is exactly 365 meters (399 yards) from my
excavations; its water has a temperature of 16° Celsius (60.8°
Fahrenheit). It is enclosed to a height of 6½ feet by a wall of large
stones joined with cement, 9¼ feet in breadth, and in front of it
there are two stone troughs for watering cattle. The second spring,
which is likewise still below the ruins of the ancient town-wall, is
exactly 725 meters (793 yards) distant from my excavations. It has a
similar enclosure of large stones, 7 feet high and 5 feet broad, and has
the same temperature. But it is out of repair, and the water no longer
runs through the stone pipe in the enclosure, but along the ground
before it reaches the pipe. The double spring spoken of in my last
report is exactly 945 meters (1033 yards) from my excavations. It
consists of two distinct springs, which run out through two stone pipes
lying beside each other in the enclosure composed of large stones joined
with earth, which rises to a height of 7 feet and is 23 feet broad; its
temperature is 17° Celsius (62.6° Fahrenheit). In front of these two
springs there are six stone troughs, which are placed in such a manner
that the superfluous water always runs from the first trough through all
the others. It is extremely probable that these are the two springs
mentioned by Homer, beside which Hector was killed.[196] When the poet
describes the one as boiling hot, the other as cold as ice, this is
probably to be understood in a metaphorical sense; for the water of both
these springs runs into the neighbouring Simoïs, and thence into the
Kalifatli-Asmak, whose enormous bed was at one time occupied by the
Scamander; the latter, however, as is well known, comes from Mount Ida
from a hot and a cold spring.

I remarked in my last memoir that the Doumbrek-Su (Simoïs) still flows
past the north of Ilium into the former channel of the Scamander, and I
afterwards said that one of its arms flowed into the sea near Cape
Rhœteum. This remark requires some explanation. The sources of the
Simoïs lie at a distance of eight hours from Hissarlik; and, as far down
as the neighbouring village of Chalil-Koï, though its water is drawn off
into four different channels for turning mills, its great bed has always
an abundance of water even during the hottest summer weather. At
Chalil-Koï, however, it divides itself into two arms; one of which,
after it has turned a mill, flows into the Plain in a north-westerly
direction, forms an immense marsh, and parts into two branches, one of
which again falls into the other arm, which flows in a westerly
direction from Chalil-Koï, and then empties itself directly into the
Kalifatli-Asmak, the ancient bed of the Scamander. The other arm of the
Simoïs, which flowed in a north-westerly direction from Chalil-Koï,
after it has received a tributary from the Kalifatli-Asmak by means of
an artificial canal, turns direct north, and, under the name of
In-tépé-Asmak, falls into the Hellespont through an enormously broad
bed, which certainly was at one time occupied by the Kalifatli-Asmak,
and in remote antiquity by the Scamander, and is close to the sepulchral
mound of Ajax, which is called In-tépé. I must draw attention to the
fact that the name of Ajax (Αἴας, gen. Αἴαντος) can even be recognised
in the Turkish name (_In_-tépé: _Tépé_ signifies “hill.”)

In returning to the article by M. Nikolaïdes, I can now also refute his
assertion that near Ilium, where I am digging, there is no hill which
can be regarded as the one described by Homer as the tomb of Batiea or
the Amazon Myrina.[197]

Strabo (XIII. i. p. 109) quotes the lines already cited from the
Iliad[198] (II. 790-794) as an argument against the identity of Ilium
with the Ilium of Priam, and adds: “If Troy had stood on the site of the
Ilium of that day, Polites would have been better able to watch the
movements of the Greeks in the ships from the summit of the Pergamus
than from the tumulus of Æsyetes, which lies on the road to Alexandria
Troas, 5 stadia (half a geographical mile) from Ilium.”

Strabo is perfectly right in saying that the Greek camp must have been
more readily seen from the summit of the Pergamus than from a sepulchral
mound on the road to Alexandria Troas, 5 stadia from Ilium; for
Alexandria Troas lies to the south-west of Ilium, and the road to it,
which is distinctly marked by the ford of the Scamander at its entrance
into the valley, goes direct south as far as Bunarbashi, whereas the
Hellespont and the Greek camp were north of Ilium. But to the south of
Ilium, exactly in the direction where the road to Alexandria Troas must
have been, I see before me a tumulus 33 feet high and 131 yards in
circumference, and, according to an exact measurement which I have
made, 1017 yards from the southern city wall. This, therefore, must
necessarily be the sepulchral mound of which Strabo writes; but he has
evidently been deceived in regard to its identity with the tumulus of
Æsyetes by Demetrius of Scepsis, who wished to prove the situation of
this mound to be in a straight line between the Greek camp and the
village of the Ilians (Ἰλιέων κώμη), and the latter to be the site of
Troy. The tumulus of Æsyetes was probably situated in the present
village of Kum-Koï, not far from the confluence of the Scamander and the
Simoïs, for the remains of an heroic tumulus several feet in height are
still to be seen there.

The mound now before me is in front of Troy, but somewhat to the side of
the Plain, and this position corresponds perfectly with the statements
which Homer gives us of the position of the monument of Batiea or the
Amazon Myrina: “προπάροιθε πόλιος” and “ἐν πεδίῳ ἀπάνευθε.” This tumulus
is now called Pacha-Tépé.

We may form an idea of what a large population Ilium possessed at the
time of Lysimachus, among other signs, from the enormous dimensions of
the theatre which he built; it is beside the Pergamus where I am
digging, and its stage is 197 feet in breadth.

The heat during the day, which is 32° Celsius (89.6° Fahrenheit), is not
felt at all, owing to the constant wind, and the nights are cool and
refreshing.

Our greatest plague here, after the incessant and intolerable hurricane,
is from the immense numbers of insects and vermin of all kinds; we
especially dread the scorpions and the so-called Σαραντοπόδια (literally
“with forty feet"--a kind of centipede), which frequently fall down from
the ceiling of the rooms upon or beside us, and whose bite is said to be
fatal.

I cannot conclude without mentioning an exceedingly remarkable person,
Konstantinos Kolobos, the owner of a shop in the village of Neo-Chorion
in the Plain of Troy, who, although born without feet, has nevertheless
made a considerable fortune in a retail business. But his talents are
not confined to business; they include a knowledge of languages; and
although Kolobos has grown up among the rough and ignorant village lads
and has never had a master, yet by self-tuition he has succeeded in
acquiring the Italian and French languages, and writes and speaks both
of them perfectly. He is also wonderfully expert in ancient Greek, from
having several times copied and learnt by heart a large etymological
dictionary, as well as from having read all the classic authors, and he
can repeat whole rhapsodies from the Iliad by heart. What a pity it is
that such a genius has to spend his days in a wretched village in the
Troad, useless to the world, and in the constant company of the most
uneducated and ignorant people, all of whom gaze at him in admiration,
but none of whom understand him!

[Illustration: No. 149. A Trojan decorated Vase of Terra-cotta (7 M.).]




CHAPTER XII.

     Discovery of an ancient wall on the northern slope--Discovery of a
     Tower on the south side--Its position and construction--It is
     Homer’s _Great Tower of Ilium_--Manner of building with stones and
     earth--A Greek inscription--Remarkable medal of the age of
     Commodus--Whorls found just below the surface--Terra-cottas found
     at small depths--Various objects found at the various depths--A
     skeleton, with ornaments of gold, which have been exposed to a
     great heat--Paucity of human remains, as the Trojans burnt their
     dead--No trace of pillars--Naming of the site as “Ilium” and the
     “Pergamus of Troy.”


Pergamus of Troy, August 4th, 1872.

[Illustration: PLATE VIII.

_Page 200._

THE GREAT TOWER OF ILIUM.

Seen from the S.E.

The top is 8 M. (26 ft.) below the surface of the Hill: the foundation
is on the rock 14 M. (46 ft.) deep: the height of the Tower is 20 feet.]

Referring to my report of the 13th of last month, I am glad now to be
able to mention that, in excavating the depths of the temple, I found a
wall 10 feet high and 6½ feet thick, which, however, has at one time
been much higher, as the quantity of stones lying beside it seem to
prove. It is at a distance of 131 feet from the declivity of the hill,
and at a perpendicular depth of 34 feet.[199] This wall is composed of
large stones joined with earth, and, as is attested by the layers of
_débris_ which extend in an oblique direction below it, it was built
originally upon the steep slope of the hill. Hence, since the erection
of the wall, the hill at this point has increased 131 feet in breadth
and 44¼ feet in height by the accumulation of _débris_. I have not
yet been able to ascertain whether this wall was the foundation of an
ancient Trojan temple, or whether it belongs to the enclosing wall
which, says Homer,[200] was built by Poseidon and Apollo. In the latter
case, it would appear strange that it is only 6½ feet thick, and was
never higher than 16½ feet, for it must be remembered that the hill
has a steep incline on the north side, and that it is very precipitous
at this part especially.

Below the wall I found five of those splendid, brilliant black flat
Trojan terra-cottas, which are so like a wheel, that they can be
distinguished at a glance from all the others. One has six suns in the
circle round the central sun; another has four stars forming a cross
round the sun; a third has three double rising suns in the circle round
the central sun; a fourth has four rising suns with five lines, forming
a cross round the sun; a fifth has three triple rising suns round the
sun. I also found below the wall a number of fragments of black Trojan
vessels which are directly recognised by their fineness, and by the long
single or double rings on the sides.

The wall proceeds from west to east, and consequently obstructs my path,
and I cannot remove the _débris_ from behind it without considerably
widening my trench, which would be a gigantic piece of work between the
enormous earthen walls. In continuing my trench in a horizontal
direction I have arrived at exactly 6½ feet below this wall. It is
very interesting from a perpendicular depth of 15½ meters, or 51-1/3
feet, to see this mass of primeval Trojan masonry in a depth of 13½
to 10½ meters (44¼ to 34 feet), and the wall beside it which was
built by Lysimachus, and is almost immediately below the surface,
standing as it were in mid air.

On the south side of the hill where, on account of the slight natural
slope, I had to make my great trench with an inclination of 14 degrees,
I discovered, at a distance of 197 feet from the declivity, a Tower, 12
meters or 40 feet thick, which likewise obstructs my path, and appears
to extend to a great length.[201] I am busily engaged in making large
excavations to the right and left of it, in order to lay bare the whole;
for, independently of the mighty interest attached to this Tower, I must
necessarily dig a channel to allow the waters of the winter rains to run
off, as they would otherwise rush violently down from my platform (197
feet in length, and with a considerable slope) against the Tower and
injure it. I have uncovered the Tower on the north and south sides along
the whole breadth of my trench, and have convinced myself that it is
built on the rock at a depth of 14 meters or 46½ feet.

An elevated mass of calcareous earth, 65½ feet broad and 16½ feet
high, rests upon the north side of the Tower, and is evidently composed
of the rubbish which had to be removed in order to level the rock for
building the Tower upon it. I have of course pierced this hillock, and
have convinced myself that the north side of the Tower, 16½ feet
above the rock, does not consist of masonry, but of large blocks of
stone lying loosely one upon another, and that only the upper part,
about a yard high, consists of actual masonry. This hillock, having the
form of a rampart, thus serves to consolidate the north side of the
Tower, and renders it possible to ascend to the top without steps. The
south side of the Tower, looking out upon the Plain, consists of very
solid masonry, composed of blocks of limestone joined with earth, some
of the stones being hewn, others not. This south side of the Tower rises
from the rock at an angle of 75 degrees.

None but those who have been present at these works can have any idea of
the enormous difficulties connected with making excavations 46½ feet
deep on the right and left of the Tower, where the _débris_ has to be
carried off to a distance of more than 262 feet. At this great distance
it is very fatiguing to work with wheel-barrows and man-carts; so I now
keep seven carts drawn by horses, which I find a very great relief.

The Tower is at present only 6 meters (20 feet high), but the nature of
its surface, and the masses of stones lying on both sides, seem to prove
that it was at one time much higher.[202] For the preservation of what
remains we have only to thank the ruins of Troy, which entirely covered
the Tower as it now stands. It is probable that after the destruction of
Troy much more of it remained standing, and that the part which rose
above the ruins of the town was destroyed by the successors of the
Trojans, who possessed neither walls nor fortifications. The western
part of the Tower, so far as it is yet uncovered, is only from 121 to
124 feet distant from the steep western slope of the hill; and,
considering the enormous accumulation of _débris_, I believe that the
Tower once stood on the western edge of the Acropolis, where its
situation would be most interesting and imposing; for its top would have
commanded, not only a view of the whole Plain of Troy, but of the sea
with the islands of Tenedos, Imbros, and Samothrace. There is not a more
sublime situation in the area of Troy than this, and I therefore presume
that it is the “Great Tower of Ilium” which Andromache ascended because
“she had heard that the Trojans were hard pressed and that the power of
the Achæans was great.”[203] After having been buried for thirty-one
centuries, and after successive nations have built their houses and
palaces high above its summit during thousands of years, this Tower has
now again been brought to light, and commands a view, if not of the
whole Plain, at least of the northern part and of the Hellespont. May
this sacred and sublime monument of Greek heroism for ever attract the
eyes of those who sail through the Hellespont! May it become a place to
which the enquiring youth of all future generations shall make
pilgrimage and fan their enthusiasm for knowledge, and above all for the
noble language and literature of Greece! May it be an inducement
speedily and completely to lay bare the walls of Troy, which must
necessarily be connected with this Tower and most probably also with the
wall laid open by me on the north side, to uncover which is now a very
easy matter.

The expenses of excavating Ilium are, however, too great for private
means, and I hope that a company will be formed, or that some government
will decide to continue my excavations, so that I may proceed to the
excavation of the acropolis of Mycenæ. Meanwhile I shall continue the
excavations at my own expense, but I shall in future confine myself to
gradually uncovering the large surrounding walls, which are sure to be
in a more or less good state of preservation at a great depth below the
city wall built by Lysimachus.

Before I had seen even the smallest ruins of walls belonging to Ilium, I
repeatedly maintained in my reports that the whole city was built, as it
is now proved by the Wall and the Tower to have been, of stones joined
with earth. That this style of building, if not more ancient, is at
least just as ancient as the so-called cyclopean, is proved by the walls
and houses of Thera (Santorin) and Therassia, which are built in the
same way, and which, as is well known, were discovered beneath three
layers of volcanic ashes 68 feet thick. These ashes were, however,
thrown up by a central volcano, which must have been at least 3800 feet
high, and which, as is generally supposed, sank into the sea at latest
1500 years before Christ.

Upon the site of the temple I found, at a depth of 6½ feet, a block
of marble 5¼ feet high, and 2¾ feet both in breadth and thickness;
it weighs about 50 tons, and contains the following inscription:--

    ΗΒΟΥΛΗΚΑΙΟΔΗΜΟ
    ΙΛΙΕΩΝΕΤΙΜΗΣΑΝΑΥ
    ΚΛΑΥΔΙΟΝΚΑΙΚΙΝΑΙ
    ΑΙΟΝΚΥΖΙΚΗΝΟΝΑ
    ΤΑΛΟΓΙΣΤΗΝΥΠΟΤΟ                                                    5
    ΟΤΑΤΟΥΑΥΤΟΚΡΑΤΟΡΟ
    ΣΑΡΟΣΤΙΤΟΥΑΙΛΙΟΥΑΔ
    ΝΟΥΑΝΤΩΝΙΟΥΣΕΒΑ
    ΕΥΣΕΒΟΥΣΚ..ΙΠΟΛΛ
    ΜΕΓΑΛΑΤΗΙΠ..ΛΕΙΚΑΤΟ                                               10
    ΣΑΝΤΑΚΑΙΠ..ΡΑΣΧΟΝΤ
    ΤΕΤΗΛΟΓΙΣΤ..ΙΑΚΑΙΣΥ
    ΓΟΡΙΑΙΣΑΝΔ...ΠΑΣΗΣΤ
    ΑΞΙΟΝΑΡΕΤΗ..ΕΝΕΚΕΝΚ
    ΕΥΝΟΙΑΣΤΗΣΠΡΟΣΤΗ                                                  15
              ΠΟΛΙΝ

The first name occurring in this inscription, of which the syllable =ΑΥ=
is preserved, is probably =ΑΥΛΟΣ=. =ΚΑΙΚΙΝΑΙ=, must certainly be the
family-name, and must indicate the Latin ablative. Whether the other
name, of which =ΑΙΟΝ= remains, is intended for =ΓΑΙΟΝ=, I do not venture
positively to maintain, but I consider it to be probable. For the
inscription, which I read as follows, is written in bad Greek,
especially towards the end: Ἡ βουλὴ καὶ ὁ δῆμος Ἰλιέων ἐτίμησαν Αὖλον
Κλαύδιον Καικινᾷ Γάϊον Κυζικηνὸν ἄρχοντα λογιστὴν ὑπὸ τοῦ θειοτάτου
αὐτοκράτορος Καίσαρος Τίτου Αἰλίου Ἀδριανοῦ Ἀντωνίου Σεβαστοῦ Εὐσεβοὺς
καὶ πολλὰ καὶ μεγάλα τῇ πόλει κατορθώσαντα καὶ παράσχοντά τε τῇ
λογιστείᾳ καὶ συνηγορίαις ἄνδρα πάσης τιμῆς ἄξιον ἀρετῆς ἕνεκεν καὶ
εὐνοίας τῆς πρὸς τὴν πόλιν.

The Emperor mentioned in this inscription is of course Antoninus Pius,
whose reign began in the year 138 A.D., and who died in 161 A.D.; it is
merely by an error that he is here called Antonius. He got the name of
Hadrian from his adoptive father, the Emperor Hadrian, and took the
name of Ælius after the death of Hadrian’s first adopted son, Ælius
Cæsar.

Upon the upper end of the block of marble there are two foot-marks, the
one considerably in advance of the other. Each of them being 15-1/3
inches long, they leave no doubt that upon this block the colossal
statue of the Cyzicene, who is praised in the inscription, stood in the
attitude of an orator. In the hinder foot there is a square hole, 1-4/5
inch square, in which was placed the iron rod for fixing the statue. To
judge from the size of the footmarks, the statue must have been more
than 8 feet high, and, as the marble block is 5¼ feet in height, the
whole must have been at least 13¼ feet high, and hence we may
conclude that the temple in which this work of art stood was very
spacious.

The excavations to the right and left of the Tower have unfortunately to
be made from above, which makes the work slower, but gives me the
advantage of being able again to state with great accuracy at what
depths the various objects are found. Generally the ruins of the Greek
period extend to a depth of 2 meters (6½ feet), but there are places
where the remains of the pre-Hellenic period commence at less than 1
meter (3¼ feet), and this is the case on the east of the Tower, where
at even 3¼ feet below the surface I found a seal made of clay with a
tree and two stars. At the same depth I found one straight and three
crooked copper knives, as well as a large double-edged axe and several
other instruments of the same metal. Almost immediately on the surface I
found, among other coins, an exceedingly remarkable medal, such as I
believe has never before been met with; on one side it has the portrait
of the Emperor Commodus (here written ΚΟΜΟΔΟΣ); upon the other there is
a figure in armour, armed with two lances (probably Minerva) standing
upon the fore part of a ship, which ends in an extremely well-wrought
head of a gazelle; in a semicircle round it is the word ΕΛΑΙΟΥΣΙΩΝ. The
medal therefore comes from the very small island of Elæusa, on the
coast of Cilicia, and it proves the remarkable fact that this small
island, which now scarcely possesses any inhabitants, was anciently so
populous that it struck its own coins.

[Illustration: No. 150. Terra-cotta Vase (7 M.).]

[Illustration: No. 151. Terra-cotta Vase in the form of an Animal, from
the Trojan Stratum (10 M.).]

The frequently discussed whorls of terra-cotta, bearing simple or double
crosses with the marks of four nails, or having three, four, or five
double rising suns in the circle round the central sun, are met with to
the east of the Tower quite close below the surface, that is, at a depth
of not quite a foot. At a depth of 1 meter (3¼ feet) I found a small
whorl, upon which the _Rosa mystica_, with its four petals, forms a
cross round the sun. At as small a depth as 2 meters (6½ feet) I
discovered a small and coarsely made cup, with the owl’s face of the
Ilian tutelary goddess, also very clumsy goblets in the form of
champagne-glasses with two handles; at a depth of 3 meters (10 feet)
small saucers with three little feet, which are adorned with 卐 and trees
of life. I also found at the same depth small terra-cotta volcanoes and
tops with the 卐, and a great number of them at a depth of 4 meters (13
feet). At the latter depth I found, when excavating the west side of the
Tower, an extremely curious cup, nearly 8 inches high, in the form of a
Mecklenburg roll (_Plutensemmel_), with four divisions, but round and
furnished with two enormous handles; it has a rounded foot, so that it
can only stand on its mouth. In the same place I found a curious vase,
with little rings on the sides for suspension by strings, and a little
spout in the bulge, so that the fluid poured into the vase would run out
again directly. Vases with such tubes in the bulge, but without rings at
the sides, are very frequently met with. Further, at a depth of 4 meters
(13 feet) I found goblets in the form of champagne-glasses, with two
large handles; also a curious little terra-cotta volcano with four 卐,
the symbol of lightning, and two sacrificial altars covered with flames.
At a depth of 5 meters (16½ feet) I found several such pieces with
extremely interesting symbolical signs; one of them had a very fine
engraving of the flaming altar and the tree of life. In the same stratum
I found a neat little vase with three feet, two handles, and prettily
engraved decorations; lastly, a number of small knives made of silex, in
the form of saws. At a depth of 6 meters (20 feet) we found a vessel, a
little more than 9 inches long, which is exactly in the shape of an
animal; it has three feet, a tail, and an upright neck, which is
connected with the back by a large handle. At a depth of 7 meters (23
feet) I found a very pretty vase, with the owl’s head of the tutelary
goddess of Troy, her two female breasts and navel; the two arms are
raised by the side of the head, and served as handles. From the same
depth we brought out a curious saw made of bone; from a depth of 8
meters (26 feet), idols with the image of the Ilian Athena, with her
girdle, made of very fine marble; at the same depth some of those
earthen funnels which I have already frequently mentioned, also several
terra-cotta balls covered with engravings of little stars. I also
discovered during the last few days, at depths of from 8 to 11 meters
(26 to 36 feet) a number of large vases and vessels of various forms,
with two, three, and four handles, and, besides these, at 10 meters (33
feet) deep, a vessel in the form of an animal, with three feet and a
tail; a horn, which projects from the upright neck and serves as a
handle, connects the head with the end of the back. This vessel is not
unlike a locomotive engine.

[Illustration: No. 152. Terra-cotta Vessel in the shape of a Pig, from
the Lowest Stratum (14 M.).]

[Illustration: No. 153. Skull of a Woman, found near some gold ornaments
in the Lowest Stratum (13 M.).]

The day before yesterday, at the depth of 14 meters (46 feet), we met
with a great number of interesting things; for instance, the neck of a
brilliant red vase with the owl’s head, which has two enormously large
eyes; then a brilliant brown vessel, 8-2/3 inches long, 7 inches high,
and nearly 6 inches thick, in the form of a sow, with a projecting but
closed head of excellent workmanship, and with three feet; the orifice
of the vessel is in the tail, which is connected with the back by a
handle. Further, a lance and several instruments, as well as a number of
copper nails, and needles of ivory for embroidering. In the ashes of the
same house, which has evidently been burnt, I also found, at a depth of
13 meters (42½ feet), a tolerably well preserved skeleton of a woman,
of which I think I have collected nearly all the bones; the skull
especially is in a good state of preservation, but has unfortunately
been broken in our excavations; however, I can easily put it together
again; the mouth is somewhat protruding, and shows good but
astonishingly small teeth. By the side of the skeleton I found a
finger-ring, three ear-rings, and a dress-pin of pure gold. The latter
is perfectly simple, and has a round head; two of the ear-rings are of
quite a primitive kind, and consist of simple gold wire 0.058 of an inch
thick; as does also the third ear-ring, which, however, is much more
finely wrought and ends in a leaf, which is formed of six gold wires of
equal thickness, riveted together.[204] The finger-ring is made of three
gold wires 0.115 of an inch thick. All of these objects bear evidence of
having been exposed to great heat. The Trojan woman must, however, have
also worn other ornaments, for by the side of the skeleton I collected
several gold beads only 0.039 of an inch large, and also a very thin
oval ring only a quarter of an inch in length. Even the colour of the
bones leaves no doubt that the lady was overtaken by fire and burnt
alive. With the exception of the skeleton of the embryo of six months
which was found in a vase upon the primary soil, this is the only human
skeleton I have ever met with in any of the pre-Hellenic strata on this
hill.[205] As we know from Homer, all corpses were burnt, and the ashes
were placed in urns, of which I have found great numbers in the ruins of
all the nations which inhabited this hill before the time of the Greek
colony. The bones, however, were always burnt to ashes; at most I have
occasionally discovered a whole tooth, in no case have I ever met with
another entire bone in the urns.

Among the remains of the same Trojan house, and not far from the
skeleton, I found the fragment of a yellow cup (vase-cover), with a very
expressive man’s face; the nose is long and somewhat aquiline. In
addition to this I found there seven of the round terra-cottas in the
shape of a flat top. Among these was one 2-1/3 inches in diameter, which
has the exact form of a wheel; in the circle round the nave it has five
rising suns. As usual, these decorations are engraved and filled with a
white substance.

Of pillars I have as yet found no trace in Troy; hence if there existed
real pillars, they must in all cases have been of wood. Moreover, the
word “κίων” is never met with in the Iliad, and only in the Odyssey. In
a house at a depth of 39¼ feet, I found a prettily carved and very
hard piece of limestone in the form of a crescent, with a round hole
1½ inch deep, and I conjecture that it may have been used as the
support for a door.

In conclusion, I flatter myself with the hope that, as a reward for my
enormous expenses and all my privations, annoyances, and sufferings in
this wilderness, but above all for my important discoveries, the
civilized world will acknowledge my right to re-christen this sacred
locality; and in the name of the divine Homer I baptize it with that
name of immortal renown, which fills the heart of everyone with joy and
enthusiasm: I give it the name of “TROY” and “ILIUM,” and I call the
Acropolis, where I am writing these lines, by the name of the “_Pergamus
of Troy_.”[206]

[Illustration: No. 154. Block of Limestone, with a socket, in which the
pivot of a door may have turned (12 M.).]




CHAPTER XIII.


     Intended cessation of the work--Further excavation of the
     Tower--Layers of red ashes and calcined stones--Objects found on
     the Tower--Weapons, implements, and ornaments of stone, copper, and
     silver--Bones--Pottery and vases of remarkable forms--Objects found
     on each side of the Tower--First rain for four months--Thanks for
     escape from the constant dangers--Results of the excavations--The
     site of Homer’s Troy identified with that of Greek Ilium--Error of
     the Bunarbashi theory--Area of the Greek city--Depth of the
     accumulated _débris_ unexampled in the world--Multitude of
     interesting objects brought to light--Care in making drawings of
     them all.


Pergamus of Troy, August 14th, 1872.

Since my report of the 4th of this month I have continued the
excavations with the utmost energy, but I am now compelled to stop the
works this evening, for my three foremen and my servant, who is also my
cashier, have been seized by the malignant marsh-fever, and my wife and
I are so unwell that we are quite unable to undertake the sole direction
throughout the day in the terrible heat of the sun. We shall therefore
leave our two wooden houses and all our machines and implements in
charge of a watchman, and to-morrow we shall return to Athens.

The admirers of Homer, on visiting the Pergamus of Troy, will find that
I have not only laid bare the Tower on the south side, along the whole
breadth of my trench, down to the rock upon which it stands, at a depth
of 14 meters or 46½ feet, but that by my excavations on the east and
west I have uncovered it considerably further, without having found its
end. On the contrary, upon the east side, where it is 40 feet broad, and
seems even to be broader still, I found the ruins of a second storey, of
which, however, as far as I can at present judge, four broad steps have
been preserved.[207] On the western side it is only 9 meters or 30 feet
in breadth, and on this side there extends to the north an enormous
wall, the thickness of which I have not been able to ascertain. The fact
of my not having been able to carry these new excavations down to the
primary soil, but only to a depth of 11 meters (36½ feet) is owing to
the brittle nature of the walls of rubbish and ruins round about the
Tower, which, as anyone may convince himself, consist of red ashes and
of stones calcined by the heat, and which threatened at any moment to
fall in and bury my workmen.

[Illustration: No. 155. A Trojan Terra-cotta Vase, with an Ornament like
the Greek _Lambda_ (8 M.).]

[Illustration: No. 156. Curious Terra-cotta Vessel in the shape of a
Mole (Tower: 7 or 8 M.).]

Upon the Tower, and more especially in the long oval depression on the
top of it, and upon the steps I found two copper Trojan lances, several
arrow-heads in the primitive form of thick pegs, from above 1 inch to
nearly 2 inches long, which were fastened at the end of the shaft;
further, an arrow-head 2½ inches in length, made of silex, and in the
form of a pointed double-edged saw; then several copper and silver nails
with round heads, which may have served as clothes-pins; further, great
quantities of bones, masses of fragments of Trojan pottery of a
brilliant red and black, and a number of vases and pots more or less
well preserved. Among them is a pretty brilliant red vase nearly 10
inches high, filled with the bones of a sea-fish. This vase (found in an
urn, which was unfortunately broken to pieces) has two small handles,
and on two sides an ornament in the form of the Greek letter _Lambda_,
but with circular ends.[208] Three other vases of a similar form, and
with exactly the same decorations, were found upon the Tower. Two other
vases of the same form, and with very similar decorations, were found at
depths of 26 and 20 feet. I also found upon the Tower an exceedingly
curious vessel nearly 6 inches in length, exactly the shape of a mole,
and with three feet; it can also be placed so that the snout of the
animal is lowest and serves as a foot; the orifice is in the tail, which
a large handle connects with the back. I also found there a splendid
Trojan vase, of a brilliant black colour, 15¾ inches high, which was
unfortunately completely broken, but I have all the pieces of it, and
consequently shall be able to restore it. Besides these, a Trojan pot,
and a globular vessel with the above-mentioned decoration of a rounded
lambda. I likewise saved, in an almost perfect condition, an exceedingly
interesting red jug, above 9 inches high, quite round below and with a
neck more bent backwards than I have ever found it in such vessels. I
further found there a Priapus and a very pretty bird’s egg made of fine
marble, many small terra-cotta whorls with the usual symbols of double
and treble crosses, six suns, four or five double or treble rising suns,
or stars, in the circle round the central sun; also one article where
four 卐 form a cross round the sun, and the rest of the space is filled
with stars. Further, a few small vessels with suspension rings were
found also on the Tower, as well as 25 very ordinary earthen plates,
which have been turned by the potter, whereas all the other articles
appear to have been made by the hand without a potter’s wheel; about
half of the plates were got out uninjured.

[Illustration: No. 157. A Trojan Dish with side Rings, and Plates turned
by the Potter (Tower: 7 M.).]

In digging to the left and right of the Tower, a number of other
interesting objects have been found since my last report; for instance,
at a depth of 2 meters (6½ feet), a number of very neat although
ordinary vessels with small rings on the sides and holes in the mouth
for hanging them up, which have hitherto only been met with much further
down; at a depth of 3 meters (10 feet) a small cover, with the owl’s
face and helmet of the Ilian Athena, of very good manufacture; then, at
a depth of 11½ feet, a small terra-cotta whorl with three stags in
the circle round the sun. At a depth of from 5 to 6 meters (16½ to 20
feet), I found a great number of small knives of silex in the form of
saws. At a depth of 10 meters (33 feet) I discovered a very curious
instrument of brilliant yellow terra-cotta, a drawing of which I give.
It is quite inexplicable to me for what purpose it can have been used;
it is almost in the shape of a shield, and by the side of the handle
which is ornamented with a tree, it has a cavity for putting the hand
in. As it is made of terra-cotta it cannot, of course, have been used as
a shield.[209]

After having had no rain here for four months, to-day, curiously enough,
just after stopping the works, we have had a thunderstorm accompanied by
a tremendous downpour of rain, and I regret extremely not to have been
able to make a channel for leading off the rain-water from the Tower as
far as the western declivity of the hill. But such a channel would need
to be 50 feet deep and as many broad, otherwise its walls, consisting of
calcined ruins and loose red ashes, would fall in. I should therefore
have to remove 5000 cubic meters (6000 cubic yards) of _débris_, and
such a gigantic piece of work I cannot now undertake.

In stopping the excavations for this year, and in looking back upon the
fearful dangers to which we have continually been exposed since the 1st
of April, between the gigantic layers of ruins, I cannot but fervently
thank God for His great mercy, that not only has no life been lost, but
that none of us has even been seriously hurt.

Now, as regards the result of my excavations, everyone must admit that I
have solved a great historical problem, and that I have solved it by the
discovery of a high civilization and immense buildings upon the primary
soil, in the depths of an ancient town, which throughout antiquity was
called Ilium and declared itself to be the successor of Troy, the site
of which was regarded as identical with the site of the Homeric Ilium by
the whole civilized world of that time. The situation of this town not
only corresponds perfectly with all the statements of the Iliad, but
also with all the traditions handed down to us by later authors; and,
moreover, neither in the Plain of Troy, nor in its vicinity, is there
any other place which could in the slightest degree be made to
correspond with them. To regard the heights of Bunarbashi as the site of
Troy, contradicts, in every respect, all the statements of Homer and of
tradition. My excavations of Bunarbashi, as well as the form of the
rocks, prove that those heights, as far as the three sepulchral mounds,
can never have been inhabited by men. As I have already said, behind
those tumuli there are the ruins of a very small town, the area of
which, surrounded on two sides by the ruins of an enclosing wall, and on
the other side by precipices, is so insignificant, that at most it can
have only possessed 2000 inhabitants. The enclosing wall of its small
Acropolis is scarcely a foot thick, and the gate scarcely 3¼ feet
wide. The accumulation of _débris_ is not worth mentioning, for in many
places the naked flat rocks are seen on the ground of the Acropolis.
Here in Ilium, however, the proportions are very different. The area of
the Greek city, which is indicated by the surrounding wall built by
Lysimachus, is large enough for a population of more than 100,000 souls;
and that the number of the inhabitants was actually as large is proved
by the stage of the theatre, which is 200 feet in breadth. Here the
surrounding wall of Lysimachus is 6½ feet thick, whereas the wall
which runs out from the Tower at a great depth below the other seems to
be five times as thick, and Homer assuredly ascribed the erection of the
walls of Troy to Poseidon and Apollo on account of their enormous
proportions.[210] Then, as regards the accumulation of _débris_, here in
the Pergamus there is no place where it amounts to less than 14 meters,
or 46½ feet, and in many places it is even much more considerable.
Thus, for instance, on my great platform, I only reached the primary
soil at a depth of 16 meters, or 53-1/3 feet, and in the depths of the
temple, on the adjacent field, belonging to Mr. Frank Calvert, I have
not yet reached it at a depth of 15½ meters, or 51-2/3 feet. Such an
accumulation of ruins has never as yet been discovered in any other part
of the world, except occasionally in the rocky valleys of Jerusalem;
where, however, it has only begun to accumulate since the destruction of
the city by Titus, and hence is scarcely more than 1800 years old.[211]
Here in Troy the remains of the Greek period cease entirely at a depth
of ½, 1, or 2 meters, and thence, down to the primary soil, we find in
regular succession the mighty layers of ruins belonging to four very
ancient nations.

In like manner, as regards the more than a hundred thousand objects
which I have brought to light, and which were used by those very ancient
tribes, I venture to say that I have revealed a new world to archæology;
for, in order to give but one instance, I have here found many thousands
of those wheels, volcanoes, or tops (_carrousels_) of terra-cotta with
the most various Aryan religious symbols.

If, as it seems, neither the Trojans nor any of the three succeeding
peoples possessed a written language, we must, as far as possible,
replace it by the “_monuments figurés_” which I have discovered.[212] As
already said, I make a drawing in my diary each evening of every one of
the objects which have been found during the day, and more especially of
the pictorial symbols, with the greatest exactness. By comparing the
innumerable symbols I have succeeded in deciphering some of them, and I
hope that my learned colleagues will succeed in explaining the rest.
Archæology shall on no account lose any one of my discoveries; every
article which can have any interest for the learned world shall be
photographed, or copied by a skilful draughtsman, and published in the
Appendix to this work; and by the side of every article I shall state
the depth in which I discovered it.

[Illustration: No. 158. A curious Trojan Jug of Terra-cotta (8 M.).]




CHAPTER XIV.

     Return to Troy to take plans and photographs--Damage to retaining
     walls--The unfaithfulness of the watchman--Stones carried off for a
     neighbouring church and houses--Injury by rain--Works for security
     during the winter--Opening up of a retaining wall on the side of
     the hill, probably built to support the temple of Athena--Supposed
     _débris_ of that temple--Drain belonging to it--Doric style of the
     temple proved by the block of Triglyphs--Temple of Apollo also on
     the Pergamus.


Athens, September 28th, 1872.

I wrote my last memoir on the 14th of last month, and on the 10th of
this month, accompanied by my wife and Sisilas the land-surveyor, I
returned to Troy in order to make a new plan of the Pergamus, which
contains the most exact picture of my excavations, as well as of the
depth in which the remains of immortal fame were discovered by me. I
also took the photographer Siebrecht from the Dardanelles with me, in
order to have photographs taken of my excavations, of two of the four
springs situated on the north side of Ilium, of Ilium’s Great Tower and
the Plain of Troy, as well as of the Hellespont as seen from this
monument.

To my horror, upon arriving there, I found that the watchman whom I had
left in charge had been faithless, and that an immense number of large
hewn stones dug out of my excavations, with which I had erected walls in
several places in order to prevent the winter rains from washing away
the _débris_ which we had pulled down, had been carried off. The man
excused himself by saying that the stones had been used for a good
purpose, namely for the construction of a belfry in the Christian
village of Yenishehr, and for building houses in the Turkish village of
Chiplak. I, of course, packed him off directly, and engaged in his place
a watchman whom I armed with a musket. He had the reputation of being
honest, and his physical strength will inspire the pilferers of the
stones with respect. What vexed me most was, that these thieves had even
laid their hands upon the splendid bastion of the time of Lysimachus,
which I had uncovered on the south side of the hill; they had made off
with two large stones from it, and the bastion would assuredly have
vanished entirely had I been away a week longer.

I also regret to see that the downpour of rain on the 14th of August has
filled the great cutting, which I made on the south side of the Tower,
in order to bring the Tower to light down as far as the rock upon which
it is built, with _débris_ to a height of 2 meters (6½ feet). So,
immediately upon my arrival, I engaged 20 workmen, 10 of whom are busy
in clearing the south side of the Tower as far as the primary soil, in
wheeling away the _débris_, and in building in front of the cutting a
wall of large blocks of stone, through which the rain-water can escape,
but not the _débris_ that may be washed down.

I have now had an opportunity of convincing myself that the rain does
not harm the Tower, for it disappears directly to the right and left of
it in the loose _débris_. Of the other ten workmen, six are occupied in
repairing the walls which have been destroyed or injured by wanton
hands, while the other four are working in order to lay bare as far as
possible an exceedingly remarkable wall, which rises at an angle of 40
degrees at the depth of 15½ meters (50½ feet) and at 43½ yards
from the edge of the hill, on the site of the temple, exactly 6½ feet
_below_ the Trojan wall which I there brought to light. (See p. 200.) As
I have before remarked, the strata of _débris_, which run obliquely to
the north below that Trojan wall, prove that it was built upon the
steep slope of the hill, and this is an additional and infallible proof
that the buttress, which is erected 6½ feet below it, can have served
no other purpose than for consolidating and strengthening the ground of
the declivity so effectually that buildings of an enormous weight might
be erected upon the summit without danger. Now as I have never hitherto
found buttresses of this kind for consolidating the declivity of the
hill among the strata of the pre-Hellenic period, although there was no
lack of grand buildings in the Pergamus of Troy (as is proved by the
colossal masses of hewn and unhewn stones from 16½ to 20 feet high,
mixed with charred _débris_, with which I had to struggle upon my great
platform), I positively believe that the above-mentioned buttress was
erected to support the site of a temple of great sanctity. I believe
this all the more, as the buttress here forms a curve and appears to
protect the whole of the north-eastern corner of the hill, which was the
extreme end of the Pergamus and perfectly corresponds with Homer’s
statement about the position of the temple of Athena, “on the summit of
the city” (ἐν πόλει ἄκρῃ: _Iliad_, VI. 297). I have no doubt that in
ascending from this buttress I shall find the ruins of that ancient
temple at a distance of less than 10 meters (33 feet). But in order to
penetrate further, I must first of all pull down the Trojan wall, 10
feet high and 6½ feet thick, which I have already frequently
mentioned, and remove the enormous masses of _débris_; this work must be
deferred till the 1st of February, for I am now too ill and tired to
attempt it. The discovery of the very ancient temple of Athena at the
north-eastern corner would, moreover solve the great problem--whence
arises the colossal accumulation of _débris_, which here covers the
declivity with a crust as hard as stone, 131 feet in thickness, and
which caused me so much trouble, not only in this excavation, but also
at the eastern end of my platform, along an extent of more than 80 feet.
It will be found that this enormous crust has arisen solely from the
remains of the sacrifices offered to the Ilian Athena.

I had not noticed this buttress at the time of my departure on the 15th
of August, and I have now only discovered it because the rain has laid
bare two of its stones. It is built of blocks of shelly limestone
(_Muschelkalk_), from about a foot to 2 feet 2 inches long and broad,
joined with earth, and it probably covered the whole north-eastern
corner of the hill from the bottom to the top. I presume that the drain
of green sandstone, nearly 8 inches broad and about 7 inches high, which
I spoke of in my report of the 25th of April, belongs to the very
ancient temple of Athena; it will be remembered that I found it at about
11½ feet above my great platform, and at a distance of 46 feet from
the edge of the declivity.

The block of triglyphs with the Sun-god and the four horses, which I
found here, proves that the temple which it adorned was built in the
Doric style; and, as the Doric is confessedly the oldest style of
architecture, the ancient temple of the Ilian Athena was doubtless in
that style. We know, however, from the Iliad[213] that there was also a
temple of Apollo in the Pergamus. It probably stood at the south-eastern
corner of the hill, for at the foot of it may be seen, in a small
excavation, a wall composed of splendid Corinthian pillars joined by
means of cement. It is probable that these pillars belong to a temple of
Apollo of the time of Lysimachus. In excavating the Tower further to the
east, I hope to find the site of this temple, and in its depths the
ruins of the very ancient temple of Apollo.

If the Trojans possessed an alphabetical language, I shall probably find
inscriptions in the ruins of the two temples. I am, however, no longer
sanguine in regard to this, as I have hitherto found no trace of writing
in the colossal strata of the four tribes which preceded the Greek
colony.[214]




WORK AT HISSARLIK IN 1873.




CHAPTER XV.

     Return to Hissarlik in 1873--Interruptions by holydays and
     weather--Strong cold north winds--Importance of good overseers--An
     artist taken to draw the objects found--Want of
     workmen--Excavations on the site of the Temple--Blocks of Greek
     sculptured marble--Great increase of the hill to the east--Further
     portions of the great Trojan wall--Traces of fire--A terra-cotta
     hippopotamus, a sign of intercourse with Egypt--Idols and owl-faced
     vases--Vases of very curious forms--Whorls--Sling-bullets of copper
     and stone--Piece of ornamented ivory belonging to a musical
     instrument--New cutting from S.E. to N.W.--Walls close below the
     surface--Wall of Lysimachus--Monograms on the stones--An
     inscription in honour of Caius Cæsar--Patronage of Ilium by the
     Julii as the descendants of Æneas--Good wine of the Troad.


Pergamus of Troy, February 22nd, 1873.

I returned here on the 31st of January with my wife, in order to
continue the excavations, but we have been repeatedly interrupted by
Greek church festivals, thunderstorms, and also by the excessive cold,
so that I can scarcely reckon that I have had as yet more than eight
good days’ work. Last autumn, by the side of my two wooden houses, I had
a house built for myself of stones from the old Trojan buildings, the
walls of which were 2 feet thick, but I was compelled to let my foremen
occupy it, for they were not sufficiently provided with clothes and
wrappers, and would have perished through the great cold. My poor wife
and I have therefore suffered very much, for the strong icy north
wind[215] blew with such violence through the chinks of our house-walls
which were made of planks, that we were not even able to light our lamps
of an evening; and although we had fire on the hearth, yet the
thermometer showed 4 degrees of cold (Réaumur = 23° Fahrenheit), and the
water standing near the hearth froze in solid masses. During the day we
could to some degree bear the cold by working in the excavations, but of
an evening we had nothing to keep us warm except our enthusiasm for the
great work of discovering Troy. Fortunately this extreme cold lasted
only four days, from the 16th to the 19th of this month, and since then
we have had glorious weather.

Besides Georgios Photidas, who was with me during the excavations of
last year, I have as foremen Georgios Barba Tsirogiannis (a sea-captain
from Chalcis in Eubœa), and an Albanese from Salamis, whom, however, I
shall shortly send back on account of his uselessness, and get two other
foremen from the Piræus in his stead. A good foreman is more useful to
me than ten common workmen, but I find that the gift of command is
rarely met with except among seamen.

I have also brought with me an artist, that I may have the objects found
copied immediately in Indian ink, and the drawings multiplied in Athens
by means of photography. This will, however, render it impossible for me
to state the depths at which the objects were found upon distinct
plates, as I have hitherto done. The articles discovered in the
different depths are now mixed together, but in each case the depth, as
well as the relative size, is stated in meters, in addition to the
number in the catalogue.

Workmen are at present not so easily to be had as before; for a merchant
from Smyrna residing here has engaged 150 men to gather a medicinal
root, which is here called γλυκόριζα, out of which liquorice-juice is
prepared. The German word _lakritze_, the French _lacorice_, and the
English _liquorice_, are evidently corruptions of γλυκόριζα. Now, as the
men employed by the Smyrna merchant work the ground at a certain price
by square measure, they earn from 12 to 23 piasters (2 frcs. 40 cent, to
4 frcs. 60 cent.) daily; whereas I can give them only 9 piasters (1 frc.
80 cent.) during the present short days. At Easter I can offer them 10
piasters, and after the 1st of June 12 piasters. As the roots are dug up
in the neighbourhood of Renkoï, it is principally the people of this
village that are engaged in the work; and for carrying on my excavations
I have to apply to the villages of Kafatli-Asmak, Yenishehr, and
Neo-Chori, which are situated in and round about the Plain of Troy. If
the weather is dry, I can count upon obtaining after to-morrow 120
workmen every day.

On the north side of the hill, at a distance of 131 feet from the
declivity and at a depth of 51 feet, the wall of white stones, which
rises at an angle of 40 degrees, 6½ feet below the Trojan wall,
seems, as I have said, to mark the site of the Greek temple of Athena.
Here I am having five terraces made on two sides simultaneously, and the
_débris_ carried away in man-carts and wheel-barrows. In the
north-eastern excavations this _débris_, from the surface to a depth of
10 feet, consists of black earth, mixed with splinters of marble; and
among them I find very many large and beautifully-sculptured blocks of
marble, which evidently belong to the temple of the time of Lysimachus,
which stood here, but are of no further value to archæology. The removal
of these blocks, the weight of which is often nearly two tons, gives me
the greatest trouble. The site of the temple is indeed indicated
distinctly enough by the existence of these large marble blocks in the
Doric style, but of the sanctuary itself there is not one stone in its
place. A depression in the earth, 112 feet long and 76 feet broad, seems
to prove that the place has been ransacked hundreds of years ago by
Turks seeking stones suitable for sepulchral monuments; they have also,
curiously enough, carried off all the foundations. Below the layer of
_débris_, 10 feet thick, which descends at an angle of from 50 to 60
degrees, there is an accumulation of ashes, covering with a crust of 131
feet thick the buttress previously mentioned, which distinctly marks the
former declivity of the hill. The declivity at this point is rounded off
towards the east; and--as is proved by the fact that the buttress itself
(as well as the layers of _débris_ that lie above it) turns in the same
direction, and that the strata of _débris_ which lie above it also
extend out to the east--the _eastern_ declivity at one time likewise
commenced at this point, whereas its present position is 262½ feet
distant from it. The hill of the Pergamus has therefore increased
262½ feet in an eastern direction since the buttress was built. I do
not believe that there is a second hill in the world whose increase in
size, during thousands of years, can in the remotest degree be compared
with this enormous growth.

Except those small round terra-cottas in the form of volcanoes and tops,
with the usual decorations, and some more or less broken pottery,
nothing has as yet been discovered in this excavation. The other
cutting--which I opened to reach the supposed site of the very ancient
temple of Athena--is at the east end of my large platform, upon which I
am again throwing the greater part of the _débris_ which is being dug
down there, because to remove it beyond the platform would be too
difficult. In the mean time I have only had this cutting made 42½
feet broad, but I intend to widen it as soon as I find any prospect of
advantage to archæology from doing so. In the lower terrace of this
cutting I find the continuation of that Trojan wall which also shows
itself in the more eastern cutting. This wall is here only 3¼ feet
high, but the stones lying below it leave no doubt that it was at one
time much higher. Every visitor to the Troad confirms my observation of
the remarkable fact, that this wall continues on the two sides of my
large cutting through the entire hill, to the right and left of the
entrance, at a depth of 39½ feet. If this wall belongs to a time
preceding the Trojan wall (as to which I can entertain no doubt, owing
to its great depth), yet the mighty ruins beneath it, as well as the
pavement of white pebbles lying below it, at a depth of 1¾ foot in my
large cutting, prove that it must have been built a long time after the
_first_ destruction of the city. But the real object of the wall here
and further to the west is utterly inexplicable to me, for it is built
above and through the ruins of mighty buildings.

The strata of _débris_ in this cutting all lie horizontally, which
leaves no doubt that they have been gradually formed in the course of
time. Their composition proves that most of the houses which stood here
were destroyed by fire. But there are also several thick strata here, in
which we find thousands of shells in a state of good preservation, which
proves that they at least cannot have belonged to buildings destroyed by
fire.

[Illustration: No. 159. Bright Red Terra-cotta Image of a Hippopotamus
(7 M.)]

Among the interesting objects discovered in this excavation, I must
especially mention a brilliant red terra-cotta hippopotamus, found at a
depth of 23 feet. It is hollow, and has a ring on the left side, and
therefore may have served as a vessel. The existence of the figure of a
hippopotamus here at a depth of 23 feet is extremely remarkable, nay,
astonishing; for this animal, as is well known, is not met with even in
Upper Egypt, and occurs only in the rivers of the interior of Africa. It
is, however, probable that hippopotami existed in Upper Egypt in ancient
times; for, according to Herodotus (II. 71), they were worshipped as
sacred animals at the Egyptian town of Papremis. At all events, Troy
must have been commercially connected with Egypt; but even so, it is
still an enigma, how the animal was so well known here as to have been
made of clay in a form quite faithful to nature.

[Illustration: No. 160. Remarkable Terra-cotta Vessel, in the shape of a
Bugle, with three feet (3 M.).]

[Illustration: No. 161. Terra-cotta Vessel with three feet, a handle,
and two ears (5 M.).]

Of idols of marble, it is only during these few days that we have found
eight, only two of which had the engraved owl’s head of the Ilian
Athena. Of vases with owl’s faces, two female breasts, and two upraised
arms, I have found only one, at a depth of 15 meters (49¼ feet), and
at a depth of 7 meters (23 feet) the upper portion of another, upon
which the stump of one of the arms may still be recognised. At a depth
of 10 feet we found two vases, with two female breasts and an immense
navel, which are doubtless also intended to represent the tutelary
goddess of Troy. Lastly, of vase-covers with an owl’s face and helmet,
the first found was at a depth of 1 meter (3¼ feet), having a double
handle in the form of a coronet; another, found at a depth of 3 meters
(26 feet), has a simple handle. Among the other terra-cotta vessels I
must specially mention an exceedingly remarkable cup in the form of a
bugle-horn with three feet, which was found at a depth of 3 meters (10
feet); also a vessel with but two feet, which, however, as is proved by
the broken places on the right side, has been attached to some other
vessel of a similar form and description; this double vessel had a ring
on either side for suspension by strings. Of the other earthenware I can
only mention a small curious vase which has three long feet, one handle,
and two others in the form of ears.

The round articles of terra-cotta in the form of volcanoes and
humming-tops, with symbolical decorations, were met with in great
quantities, as they always are. Four sling-bullets were discovered, one
of which, made of copper, was brought out from a depth of 49 feet, one
of alabaster from 23 feet, and two of diorite from a depth of from 20 to
23 feet. At a depth of 4 meters (13 feet) I found a splendidly
ornamented flat piece of ivory, which must evidently have been part of a
musical instrument.[216] Lastly, at the depth of 1 meter (3¼ feet)
there was a fragment of a female statue of fine marble, executed in a
masterly style. It not improbably represents the tutelary goddess of
Ilium, whose temple, as we know, stood in the Pergamus.

Simultaneously with these excavations I had 22 men working in a
north-westerly direction, from the south-eastern corner of the
Acropolis, in order to lay bare the Great Tower still further on that
side, an operation that has become impossible to effect from my great
trench. But as the hill at this point has only a very gradual slope I
was compelled to make the new cutting with a considerable slope, which
renders the carting-off of the _débris_ much more troublesome, but is
absolutely necessary, to enable us to reach the requisite depth of 26
feet for arriving at the Tower. At the very commencement of this
cutting, at a foot below the surface, I came upon two enormous walls,
each of which is 10 feet thick. The first seems to belong to the Middle
Ages,[217] and consists of large blocks of Corinthian pillars joined by
cement and of other marble blocks taken from ancient buildings. The
second wall, which follows immediately, must certainly belong to the
town-wall built by Lysimachus, which was 40 stadia long.[218] It is
composed of large and beautifully hewn blocks of limestone, which are
laid one upon another without any kind of cement, and which generally
bear a monogram. As the letter is not always the same, and as for
instance upon one stone there is a Σ, and upon another an Υ or a Δ, I
presume that they are the initials of the different builders. In the
first wall I found a marble slab nearly a foot thick, 32½ inches
broad, and 3½ feet long, with the following inscription:--

      ΗΒΟΥΛΗΚΑΙΟΔΗΜΟΣ
      ΓΑΙΟΝΚΑΙΣΑΡΑΤΟΝΥΙΟΝΤΟΥΣΕΒΑΣ
    ΤΟΥΤΟΝΣΥΝΓΕΝΗΚΑΙΠΑΤΡΩΝΑΚΑΙΕΥ
    ΕΡΓΕΤΗΝΤΗΣΠΟΛΕΩΣ

    Ἡ βουλὴ καὶ ὁ δῆμος
    Γάϊον Καίσαρα τὸν υἱὸν τοῦ Σεβασ-
    τοῦ τὸν συνγενῆ καὶ πατρῶνα καὶ εὐ-
    εργέτην τῆς πόλεως.

The person praised in this inscription can by no means have been the
Emperor Caligula, for in that case the title αὐτοκράτωρ would have been
added. But as this word is wanting, the person meant is certainly Caius
Cæsar, the son of Vipsanius Agrippa and of Julia, the daughter of
Octavianus. He had a brother called Lucius. Both were adopted by
Augustus, and owing to this adoption they received the title of “υἱὸς
τοῦ Σεβαστοῦ,” and both were selected by Augustus as his successors.
Caius Cæsar, born in the year 20 B.C., was adopted at the age of three
years. He took part in the Trojan games, which Augustus instituted at
the dedication of the temple of Marcellus. At the age of fifteen he was
appointed Consul, and when nineteen he was made Governor of Asia. During
his administration there he became involved in a war with Phraates the
king of Armenia, was wounded, and died in the year 4 after Christ, on
the 21st of February, at the age of 24.[219] As in the inscription he is
called the kinsman, the benefactor, and the patron of Ilium, it is
probable that he often came here during his administration; at all
events, he took great interest in the city, and lavished favours upon
it. The family of the Julii always attached great importance to their
descent from Iülus (or Ascanius) the son of Æneas; and the sole
political object of Virgil’s Æneid was to prove and glorify their
genealogy. This explains the favours which the Julii lavished upon
Ilium, and their hatred against the Greeks because they destroyed Troy,
and also because they had espoused the cause of Mark Antony.

An _oka_ of wine, which contains about two ordinary wine-bottles, last
year cost 1¼ piaster (25 centimes); now it costs 2 piasters (40
centimes) the oka; but it is of a most excellent quality, and I prefer
it to any French wine.

[Illustration: No. 162. Terra-cotta Image of a Pig, curiously marked
with Stars (4 M.).]




CHAPTER XVI.

     Increased number of workmen--Further uncovering of the great
     buttress--Traces of a supposed small temple--Objects found on its
     site--Terra-cotta serpents’ heads: great importance attached to the
     serpent--Stone implements: hammers of a peculiar form--Copper
     implements: a sickle--Progress of the works at the south-east
     corner--Remains of an aqueduct from the Thymbrius--Large jars, used
     for cellars--Ruins of the Greek temple of Athena--Two important
     inscriptions discussed--Relations of the Greek Syrian Kings
     Antiochus I. and III. to Ilium.


Pergamus of Troy, March 1st, 1873.

[Illustration: No. 163. One of the largest marble Idols, found in the
Trojan Stratum (8 M.).]

Since Monday morning, the 24th of last month, I have succeeded in
increasing the number of my workmen to 158, and as throughout this week
we have had splendid weather, I have been able to accomplish a good
stroke of work in the six days, in spite of the many hindrances and
difficulties which I had at first to struggle against. Since the 1st of
February I have succeeded in removing more than 11,000 cubic yards of
_débris_ from the site of the temple. To-day, at last, I have had the
pleasure of uncovering a large portion of that buttress, composed of
large unhewn white stones, which at one time covered the entire
north-eastern corner of the declivity, whereas, in consequence of its
increase in size during the course of many centuries by the ashes of the
sacrificed animals, the present declivity of the hill is 131 feet
distant from it to the north, and 262½ feet distant to the east. To
my surprise I found that this buttress reaches to within 26 feet of the
surface, and thus, as the primary soil is elsewhere always at from 46 to
52½ feet below the surface, it must have covered an isolated hill
from 20 to 26 feet high, at the north-east end of the Pergamus, where
at one time there doubtless stood a small temple. Of this sanctuary,
however, I find nothing but red wood-ashes, mixed with the fragments of
brilliant black Trojan earthenware, and an enormous number of unhewn
stones, which seem to have been exposed to a fearful heat, but no trace
of sculpture: the building must therefore have been very small. I have
broken through the buttress of this temple-hill at a breadth of 13 feet,
in order to examine the ground at its foundation. I dug it away to a
depth of 5 feet, and found that it consists of the virgin soil, which is
of a greenish colour. Upon the site of the small and very ancient
temple, which is indicated by the buttress, I find in two places pure
granular sand, which appears to extend very far down, for after
excavating it to a depth of 6½ feet I did not reach the end of the
stratum. Whether this hill consists entirely, or but partially, of earth
and sand, I cannot say, and must leave it undecided, for I should have
to remove thousands more of cubic yards of rubbish. Among the _débris_
of the temple we found a few, but exceedingly interesting objects, for
instance, the largest marble idol that has hitherto been found, which is
5¼ inches long and 3 inches broad. Further, the lid of a pot, which
is divided into twelve fields by roughly engraved lines. Ten of the
fields are ornamented with little stars, one with two signs of
lightning, and another with six lines. There was also a small idol of
terra-cotta with the owl’s head of the Ilian tutelary goddess, with two
arms and long hair hanging down at the back of the head; but it is so
roughly made that, for instance, the eyes of the goddess are above the
eyebrows. I also found among the _débris_ of the temple a vase with the
owl’s face, two female breasts and a large navel; of the face only one
eye and an ear is preserved. I must draw especial attention to the fact
that both upon the vases with owls’ heads two female breasts and a
navel, and upon all of the others without the owl’s face and adorned
only with two female breasts and a navel, the latter is always ten times
larger than the breasts. I therefore presume that the navel had some
important significance, all the more so as it is frequently decorated
with a cross, and in one case even with a cross and the marks of a nail
at each of the four ends of the cross.[220] We also discovered among the
ruins of the small and very ancient building some pretty wedges
(battle-axes), and a number of very rude hammers made of diorite;
besides a quantity of those small red and black terra-cotta whorls, with
the usual engravings of four or five 卐, or of three, four, or five
triple rising suns in the circle round the central sun, or with other
extremely strange decorations.

[Illustration: No. 164. Terra-cotta Pot-lid, engraved with symbolical
marks (6 M.).]

[Illustration: No. 165. A curious Terra-cotta Idol of the Ilian Athena
(7 M.).]

At a depth of 7 to 8 meters (23 to 26 feet), we also came upon a number
of vases having engraved decorations, and with three feet or without
feet, but generally with rings at the sides and holes in the mouth for
suspension by strings; also goblets in the form of a circular tube, with
a long spout at the side for drinking out of, which is always connected
with the other side of the tube by a handle; further, smaller or larger
jars with a mouth completely bent backwards; small terra-cotta funnels;
very curious little sling-bullets made of diorite, from only ¾ of an
inch to above 1 inch long. The most remarkable of all the objects found
this year is, however, an idol of very hard black stone above 2½
inches long and broad, discovered at a depth of 9 meters (29½ feet).
The head, hands, and feet have the form of hemispheres, and the head is
only recognised by several horizontal lines engraved below it, which
seem to indicate necklaces. In the centre of the belly is a navel, which
is as large as the head, but, instead of protruding as in the case of
the vases, it is indicated by a circular depression. The back of the
middle of the body is arched, and has the appearance of a shield, so
that in looking at the idol one is involuntarily led to believe that it
represents Mars, the god of war.

[Illustration: No. 166. Pretty Terra-cotta jug, with the neck bent back
(7 M.).]

[Illustration: No. 167. Remarkable Trojan Idol of Black Stone (7 M.).]

[Illustration: Nos. 168, 169. Heads of Horned Serpents (4 M.).]

[Illustration: No. 170. A Serpent’s Head, with horns on both sides, and
very large eyes (6 M.).]

At a depth of from 4 to 7 meters (13 to 23 feet) we also met with
fragments of terra-cotta serpents, whose heads are sometimes represented
with horns. The latter must certainly be a very ancient and significant
symbol of the greatest importance, for even now there is a superstition
that the horns of serpents, by merely coming in contact with the human
body, cure a number of diseases, and especially epilepsy; also that by
dipping them in milk the latter is instantly turned into cheese, and
other notions of the same sort. On account of the many wholesome and
useful effects attributed to the horns of serpents, they are regarded as
immensely valuable, and on my return here at the end of January one of
my last year’s workmen was accused by a jealous comrade of having found
two serpents’ horns in an urn at a depth of 52½ feet, and of having
made off with them. All my assurances that there are no such things as
serpents horns could not convince the men, and they still believe that
their comrade has robbed me of a great treasure. The serpents’ heads not
ornamented with horns generally represent the poisonous asp; above the
mouth they have a number of dots, and the head and back are divided by
cross lines into sections which are filled with dots.[221] These flat
serpents’ heads have on the opposite side lines running longitudinally
like female hair. We also found terra-cotta cones an inch and a half
high, with three holes not pierced right through. At a depth of from
3¼ to 6½ feet we have discovered several more terra-cotta vases
without the owl’s face, but with two female breasts and a large navel,
and with two small upright handles in the form of arms. In all the
strata below 13 feet we meet with quantities of implements of diorite,
and quoits of granite, sometimes also of hard limestone. Hammers and
wedges (battle-axes) of diorite and of green stone were also found, in
most cases very prettily wrought. The hammers do not all possess a
perforated hole; upon many there is only a cavity on both sides, about
1/5 to 2/5 of an inch deep.

[Illustration: No. 171. Head of an Asp in Terra-cotta (both sides) (4
M.).]

Of metals, copper only was met with. To-day we found a copper sickle
5½ inches long; of copper weapons we have to-day for the first time
found two lances at a depth of 23 feet, and an arrow-head at 4 meters
(13 feet) deep. We find numbers of long, thin copper nails with a round
head, or with the point only bent round. I now also find them repeatedly
at a depth of from 5 to 6 meters (16½ to 20 feet), whereas since the
commencement of my excavations in the year 1871, I only found two nails
as far down as this.[222]

I am now also vigorously carrying forward the cutting which I made on
the south-eastern corner of the Pergamus, for uncovering the eastern
portion of the Great Tower as far as my last year’s cutting, to a length
of 315 feet and a breadth of from 65½ to 78¾ feet. The work
advances rapidly, as this excavation is near the southern declivity of
the hill, and the rubbish has therefore not far to be carted off. I have
made eight side passages for removing it. Experience has taught me that
it is far more profitable not to have any special men for loading the
wheel-barrows, but to let every workman fill his own barrow. Experience
has also shown me that much precious time is lost in breaking down the
earthen walls with the long iron levers driven in by a ram, and that it
is much more profitable and less dangerous to the workmen always to keep
the earthen walls at an angle of 55 degrees, to dig as occasion
requires, and to cut away the rubbish from below with broad pickaxes. In
this new excavation I find four earthen pipes, from 18¾ to 22¼
inches long, and from 6½ to 11¾ inches thick, laid together for
conducting water, which was brought from a distance of 1½ German mile
(about 7 English miles) from the upper Thymbrius. This river is now
called the Kemar, from the Greek word καμάρα (vault), because an
aqueduct of the Roman period crosses its lower course by a large arch.
This aqueduct formerly supplied Ilium with drinking water from the upper
portion of the river. But the Pergamus required special aqueducts, for
it lies higher than the city.

In this excavation I find an immense number of large earthen wine-jars
(πίθοι) from 1 to 2 meters (3¼ to 6½ feet) high, and 29½ inches
across, as well as a number of fragments of Corinthian pillars and other
splendidly sculptured blocks of marble. All of these marble blocks must
certainly have belonged to those grand buildings whose southern wall I
have already laid bare to a length of 285½ feet. It is composed of
small stones joined with a great quantity of cement as hard as stone,
and rests upon large well hewn blocks of limestone. The direction of
this wall, and hence of the whole building, is E.S.E. by E.

Three inscriptions, which I found among its ruins, and in one of which
it is said that they were set up in the “ἱερόν,” that is, in the temple,
leave no doubt that this was the temple of the Ilian Athena, the
“πολιοῦχος θεά,” for it is only this sanctuary that could have been
called simply “τὸ ἱερόν,” on account of its size and importance, which
surpassed that of all the other temples of Ilium. Moreover the position
of the building, which is turned towards the rising sun, corresponds
exactly with the position of the Parthenon and all the other temples of
Athena. From the very commencement of my excavations I have searched for
this important sanctuary, and have pulled down more than 130,000 cubic
yards of _débris_ from the most beautiful parts of the Pergamus in order
to find it; and I now discover it exactly where I should have least
expected to come upon it. I have sought for this _new_ temple, which was
probably built by Lysimachus, because I believed, and still believe,
that in its depths I shall find the ruins of the primeval temple of
Athena, and I am more likely here than anywhere to find something to
throw light upon Troy. Of the inscriptions found here, as mentioned
above, one is written upon a marble slab in the form of a tombstone,
5¼ feet long, 17½ inches broad, and 5¾ inches thick, and runs
as follows:--

    ΜΕΛΕΑΓΡΟΣΙΛΙΕΩΝΤΗΙΒΟΥΛΗΙΚΑΙΤΩΙΔΗΜΩΙΧΑΙ
    ΡΕΙΝΑΠΕΔΩΚΕΝΗΜΙΝΑΡΙΣΤΟΔΙΚΙΔΗΣΟΑΣΣΙΟΣΕΠΙ
    ΣΤΟΛΑΣΠΑΡΑΤΟΥΒΑΣΙΛΕΩΣΑΝΤΙΟΧΟΥΩΝΤΑΝΤΙΓΡΑ
    ΦΑΥΜΙΝΥΠΟΓΕΓΡΑΦΑΜΕΝΕΝΕΤΥΧΕΝΔΗΜΙΝΚΑΙΑΥ
    ΤΟΣΦΑΜΕΝΟΣΠΟΛΛΩΝΑΥΤΩΙΚΑΙΕΤΕΡΩΝΔΙΑΛΕ                                5
    ΓΟΜΕΝΩΝΚΑΙΣΤΕΦΑΝΟΝΔΙΔΟΝΤΩΝΩΣΠΕΡΚΑΙΗ
    ΜΕΙΣΠΑΡΑΚΟΛΟΥΘΟΥΜΕΝΔΙΑΤΟΚΑΙΠΡΕΣΒΕΥΣΑΙΑ
    ΠΟΤΩΝΠΟΛΕΩΝΤΙΝΑΣΠΡΟΣΗΜΑΣΒΟΥΛΕΣΘΑΙΤΗΝ
    ΧΩΡΑΝΤΗΝΔΕΔΟΜΕΝΗΝΑΥΤΩΙΥΠΟΤΟΥΒΑΣΙΛΕΩΣΑΝ
    ΤΙΟΧΟΥΚΑΙΔΙΑΤΟΙΕΡΟΝΚΑΙΔΙΑΤΗΝΠΡΟΣΥΜΑΣΕΥΝΟΙ                         10
    ΑΝΠΡΟΣΕΝΕΓΚΑΣΘΑΙΠΡΟΣΤΗΝΥΜΕΤΕΡΑΝΠΟΛΙΝΑ
    ΜΕΝΟΥΝΑΞΙΟΙΓΕΝΕΣΘΑΙΑΥΤΩΙΠΑΡΑΤΗΣΠΟΛΕΩΣΑΥ
    ΤΟΣΥΜΙΝΔΗΛΩΣΕΙΚΑΛΩΣΔΑΝΠΟΗΣΑΙΤΕΨΗΦΙΣΑΜΕ
    ΝΟΙΤΕΠΑΝΤΑΤΑΦΙΛΑΝΘΡΩΠΑΑΥΤΩΙΚΑΙΚΑΘΟΤΙΑΝ
    ΣΥΓΧΩΡΗΣΗΙΤΗΝΑΝΑΓΡΑΦΗΝΠΟΗΣΑΜΕΝΟΙΚΑΙΣΤΗ                            15
    ΛΩΣΑΝΤΕΣΚΑΙΔΕΝΤΕΣΕΙΣΤΟΙΕΡΟΝΙΝΑΜΕΝΗΙΥΜΙΝ
    ΒΕΒΑΙΩΣΕΙΣΠΑΝΤΑΤΟΓΧΡΟΝΟΝΤΑΣΥΓΧΩΡΗΘΕΝΤΑ
      ΕΡΡΩΣΘΕ     ΒΑΣΙΛΕΥΣΑΝΤΙΟΧΟΣΜΕΛΕΑ
    ΓΡΩΙΧΑΙΡΕΙΝΔΕΔΩΚΑΜΕΝΑΡΙΣΤΟΔΙΚΙΔΗΙΤΩΙΑΣΣΙΩΙ
    ΓΗΣΕΡΓΑΣΙΜΟΥΠΛΕΘΡΑΔΙΣΧΙΛΙΑΠΡΟΣΕΝΕΓΚΑΣΘΑΙ                          20
    ΠΡΟΣΤΗΝΙΛΙΕΩΝΠΟΛΙΝΗΣΚΗΨΙΩΝΣΥΟΥΝΣΥΝΤΑΞΟΝ
    ΠΑΡΑΔΕΙΞΑΙ ΑΡΙΣΤΟΔΙΚΙΔΗΙΑΠΟΤΗΣΟΜΟΡΟΥΣΗΣΤΗΙ
    ΓΕΡΓΙΘΙΑΙΗΤΗΙΣΚΗΨΙΑΙΟΥΑΝΔΟΚΙΜΑΖΗΙΣΤΑΔΙΣΧΙΛΙΑ
    ΠΛΕΘΡΑΤΗΣΓΗΣΚΑΙΠΡΟΣΟΡΙΣΑΙΕΙΣΤΗΝΙΛΙΕΩΝΗΤΗΝ
    ΣΚΗΨΙΩΝ   ΕΡΡΩΣΟ   ΒΑΣΙΛΕΥΣΑΝΤΙΟΧΟΣΜΕΛΕ                           25
    ΑΓΡΩΙΧΑΙΡΕΙΝΕΝΕΤΥΧΕΝΗΜΙΝΑΡΙΣΤΟΔΙΚΙΔΗΣΟ
    ΑΣΣΙΟΣΑΞΙΩΝΔΟΥΝΑΙΑΥΤΩΙΗΜΑΣΕΝΤΗΙΕΦΕΛΛΗΣ
    ΠΟΝΤΟΥΣΑΤΡΑΠΕΙΑΙΤΗΝΠΕΤΡΑΝΗΜΠΡΟΤΕΡΟΝ
    ΕΙΧΕΝΜΕΛΕΑΓΡΟΣΚΑΙΤΗΣΧΩΡΑΣΤΗΣΠΕΤΡΙΔΟΣ
    ΕΡΓΑΣΙΜΟΥΠΕΘΡΑΧΙΛΙΑΠΕΝΤΑΚΟΣΙΑΚΑΙΑΛΛΑ                              30
    ΓΗΣΠΛΕΘΡΑΔΙΣΧΙΛΙΑΕΡΓΑΣΙΜΟΥΑΠΟΤΗΣΟΜΟ
    ΡΟΥΣΗΣΤΗΙΠΡΟΤΕΡΟΝΔΟΘΕΙΣΗΙΑΥΤΩΙΜΕΡΙΔΙΩΙ
    ΚΑΙΗΜΕΙΣΤΗΝΤΕΠΕΤΡΑΝΔΕΔΩΚΑΜΕΝΑΥΤΩΙΕΙ
    ΜΗΔΕΔΟΤΑΙΑΛΛΩΙΠΡΟΤΕΡΟΝΚΑΙΤΗΓΧΩΡΑΝΤΗΝ
    ΠΡΟΣΤΗΙΠΕΤΡΑΙΚΑΙΑΛΛΑΓΗΣΠΛΕΘΡΑΔΙΣΧΙΛΙΑ                             35
    ΕΡΓΑΣΙΜΟΥΔΙΑΤΟΦΙΛΟΝΟΝΤΑΗΜΕΤΕΡΟΝΠΑΡΕΣ
    ΧΗΣΘΑΙΗΜΙΝΤΑΣΚΑΤΑΥΤΟΝΧΡΕΙΑΣΜΕΤΑΠΑΣΗΣ
    ΕΥΝΟΙΑΣΚΑΙΠΡΟΘΥΜΙΑΣΣΥΟΥΝΕΠΙΣΚΕΨΑΜΕΝΟΣ
    ΕΙΜΗΔΕΔΟΤΑΙΑΛΛΩΙΠΡΟΤΕΡΟΝΑΥΤΗΗΜΕΡΙΣΠΑ
    ΡΑΔΕΙΞΟΝΑΥΤΗΝΚΑΙΤΗΝΠΡΟΣΑΥΤΗΙΧΩΡΑΝΑΡΙΣ                             40
    ΤΟΔΙΚΙΚΙΔΗΙΚΑΙΑΠΟΤΗΣΒΑΣΙΛΙΚΗΣΧΩΡΑΣΤΗΣΟΜΟ
    ΡΟΥΣΗΣΤΗΙΠΡΟΤΕΡΟΝΔΕΔΟΜΕΝΗΙ ΧΩΡΑΙΑΡΙΣΤΟΔΙ
    ΚΙΔΗΙΣΥΝΤΑΞΟΝΚΑΤΑΜΕΤΡΗΣΑΙΚΑΙΠΑΡΑΔΕΙΞΑΙ
    ΑΥΤΩΙΠΛΕΘΡΑΔΙΣΧΙΛΙΑΚΑΙΕΑΣΑΙΑΥΤΩΙΠΡΟΣΕΝΕΓ
    ΚΑΣΘΑΙΠΡΟΣΗΝΑΜΒΟΥΛΗΤΑΙΠΟΛΙΝΤΩΝΕΝΤΗΙΧΩΡΑΙ                          45
    ΤΕΚΑΙΣΥΜΜΑΧΙΑΙΟΙΔΕΒΑΣΙΛΙΚΟΙΛΑΟΙΟΙΕΚΤΟΥΤΟ
    ΠΟΥΕΝΩΙΕΣΤΙΝΗΠΕΤΡΑΕΑΜΒΟΥΛΩΝΤΑΙΟΙΚΕΙΝΕΝΤΗΙ
    ΠΕΤΡΑΙΑΣΦΑΛΕΙΑΣΕΝΕΚΕΣΥΝΤΕΤΑΧΑΜΕΝΑΡΙΣΤΟ
    ΤΟΔΙΚΙΔΗΙΕΑΝΑΥΤΟΥΣΟΙΚΕΙΝ     ΕΡΡΩΣΟ
    ΒΑΣΙΛΕΥΣΑΝΤΙΟΧΟΣΜΕΛΕΑΓΡΩΙΧΑΙΡΕΙΝΕΝΕΤΥΧΕΝΗ                         50
    ΜΙΝΑΡΙΣΤΟΔΙΚΙΔΗΣΦΑΜΕΝΟΣΠΕΤΡΑΝΤΟΧΩΡΙΟΝΚΑΙΤΗΜ
    ΧΩΡΑΝΤΗΝΣΥΓΚΥΡΟΥΣΑΝΠΕΡΙΗΣΠΡΟΤΕΡΟΝΕΓΡΑΨΑΜΕΝ
    ΔΙΔΟΝΤΕΣΑΥΤΩΙΟΥΔΕΤΙΚΑΙΝΥΝΠΑΡΕΙΛΗΦΕΝΑΙΔΙΑΤΟΑΘΗ
    ΝΑΙΩΙΤΩΙΕΠΙΤΟΥΝΑΥΣΤΑΘΜΟΥΕΠΙΚΕΧΩΡΗΣΘΑΙΚΑΙΗΞΙ
    ΩΣΕΝΑΝΤΙΜΕΝΤΗΣΠΕΤΡΙΤΙΔΟΣΧΩΡΑΣΠΑΡΑΔΕΙΧΘΗΝΑΙ                        55
    ΑΥΤΩΙΤΑΙΣΑΠΛΕΘΡΑΣΥΓΧΩΡΗΘΗΝΑΙΔΕΚΑΙΑΛΛΑΠΛΕ
    ΘΡΑΔΙΣΧΙΛΙΑΠΡΟΣΕΝΕΓΚΑΣΘΑΙΠΡΟΣΗΝΑΜΒΟΥΛΗΤΑΙ
    ΤΩΜΠΟΛΕΩΝΤΩΝΕΝΤΗΙΗΜΕΤΕΡΑΙΣΥΜΜΑΧΙΑΙΚΑΘΑ
    ΠΕΡΚΑΙΠΡΟΤΕΡΟΝΕΓΡΑΨΑΜΕΝΟΡΩΝΤΕΣΟΥΝΑΥΤΟΝ
    ΕΥΝΟΥΝΟΝΤΑΚΑΙΠΡΟΘΥΜΟΝΕΙΣΤΑΗΜΕΤΕΡΑΠΡΑΓΜΑ                           60
    ΤΑΒΟΥΛΟΜΕΘΑΠΟΛΥΩΡΕΙΝΤΑΝΘΡΩΠΟΥΚΑΙΠΕΡΙ
    ΤΟΥΤΩΝΣΥΓΚΕΧΩΡΗΚΑΜΕΝΦΗΣΙΝΔΕΕΙΝΑΙΤΗΣ
    ΠΕΤΡΙΤΙΔΟΣΧΩΡΑΣΤΑΣΥΓΧΩΡΗΘΕΝΤΑΑΥΤΩΙ
    ΠΛΕΘΡΑΧΙΛΙΑΠΕΝΤΑΚΟΣΙΑΣΥΝΤΑΞΟΝΟΥΝΚΑΤΑ
    ΜΕΤΡΗΣΑΙΑΡΙΣΤΟΔΙΚΙΔΗΙΚΑΙΠΑΡΑΔΕΙΞΑΙΓΗΣ                             65
    ΕΡΓΑΣΙΜΟΥΤΑΤΕΔΙΣΧΙΛΙΑΚΑΙΠΕΝΤΑΚΟΣΙΑΠΛΕ
    ΘΡΑΚΑΙΑΝΤΙΤΩΝΠΕΡΙΤΗΝΠΕΤΡΑΝΑΛΛΑΕΡΓΑ
    ΣΙΜΟΥΧΙΛΙΑΠΕΝΤΑΚΟΣΙΑΑΠΟΤΗΣΒΑΣΙΛΙΚΗΣΧΩ
    ΡΑΣΤΗΣΣΥΝΟΡΙΖΟΥΣΗΣΤΗΙΕΝΑΡΧΗΙΔΟΘΕΙΣΗΙ
    ΑΥΤΩΙΠΑΡΗΜΩΝΕΑΣΑΙΔΕΚΑΙΠΡΟΣΕΝΕΓΚΑΣΘΑΙ                              70
    ΤΗΝΧΩΡΑΝΑΡΙΣΤΟΔΙΚΙΔΗΝΠΡΟΣΗΝΑΝΒΟΥΛΗΤΑΙ
    ΠΟΛΙΝΤΩΝΕΝΤΗΙΗΜΕΤΕΡΑΙΣΥΜΜΑΧΙΑΙΚΑΘΑ
    ΠΕΡΚΑΙΕΝΤΗΙΠΡΟΤΕΡΟΝΕΠΙΣΤΟΛΗΙΕΓΡΑΨΑ
    ΜΕΝ ΕΡΡΩΣΟ



    Μελέαγρος Ἰλιέων τῆι βουλῆι καὶ τῶι δήμωι χαί-
    ρειν. Ἀπέδωκεν ἡμῖν Ἀριστοδικίδης ὁ Ἄσσιος ἐπι-
    στολὰς παρὰ τοῦ βασιλέως Ἀντιόχου, ὧν τἀντίγρα-
    φα ὑμῖν ὑπογεγράφαμεν· ἐνέτυχεν δ’ ἡμῖν καὶ α(ὐ)-
    τὸς φάμενος, πολλῶν αὐτῶι καὶ ἑτέρων, διαλε-                       5
    γομένων καὶ στέφανον διδόντων, ὥσπερ καὶ ἡ-
    μεῖς παρακολουθοῦμεν διὰ τὸ καὶ πρεσβεῦσαι ἀ-
    πὸ τῶν πόλεων τινὰς πρὸς ἡμᾶς, βούλεσθαι τὴν
    χώραν τὴν δεδομένην αὐτῶι ὑπὸ τοῦ βασιλέως Ἀν-
    τιόχου καὶ διὰ τὸ ἱερὸν καὶ διὰ τὴν πρὸς ὑμᾶς εὔνοι-              10
    αν προσενέγκασθαι πρὸς τὴν ὑμετέραν πόλιν. Ἃ
    μὲν οὖν ἀξιοῖ γενέσθαι αὐτῶι παρὰ τῆς πόλεως, αὐ-
    τὸς ὑμῖν δηλώσει· καλῶς δ’ ἂν ποήσαιτε ψηφισάμε-
    νοί τε πάντα τὰ φιλάνθρωπα αὐτῶι καὶ καθ’ ὅτι ἂν
    συγχωρήσηι τὴν ἀναγραφὴν ποησάμενοι καὶ στη-                      15
    λώσαντες καὶ θέντες εἰς τὸ ἱερὸν, ἵνα μένηι ὑμῖν
    βεβαίως εἰς πάντα τὸγ χρόνον τὰ συγχωρηθέντα.
      ἔῤῥωσθε.     Βασιλεὺς Ἀντίοχος Μελεά-
    γρωι χαίρειν. Δεδώκαμεν Ἀριστοδικίδηι τῶι Ἀσσίωι
    γῆς ἐργασίμου πλέθρα δισχίλια προσενέγκασθαι                      20
    πρὸς τὴν Ἰλιέων πόλιν ἢ Σκηψίων. Σὺ οὖν σύνταξον
    παραδεῖξαι Ἀριστοδικίδηι ἀπὸ τῆς ὁμορούσης τῆι
    Γεργιθίαι ἢ τῆι Σκηψίαι, οὗ ἂν δοκιμάζηις τὰ δισχίλια
    πλέθρα τῆς γῆς καὶ προσορίσαι εἰς τὴν Ἰλιέων ἢ τὴν
    Σκηψίων.   ἔῤῥωσο.   Βασιλεὺς Ἀντίοχος Μελε-                      25
    άγρωι χαίρειν. Ἐνέτυχεν ἡμῖν Ἀριστοδικίδης ὁ
    Ἄσσιος ἀξιῶν δοῦναι αὐτῶι ἡμᾶς ἐν τῆι ἐφ’ Ἑλλησ-
    πόντου σατραπείαι τὴν Πέτραν, ἣμ πρότερον
    εἶχεν Μελέαγρος καὶ τῆς χώρας τῆς Πετρίδος
    ἐργασίμου πέθρα[223] χίλια πεντακόσια καὶ ἄλλα                    30
    γῆς πλέθρα δισχίλια ἐργασίμου ἀπὸ τῆς ὁμο-
    ρούσης τῆι πρότερον δοθείσηι αὐτῶι μεριδίωι (;)
    καὶ ἡμεῖς τήν τε Πέτραν δεδώκαμεν αὐτῶι, εἰ
    μὴ δέδοται ἄλλωι πρότερον καὶ τὴγ χώραν τὴν
    πρὸς τῆι Πέτραι καὶ ἄλλα γῆς πλέθρα δισχίλια                      35
    ἐργασίμου, διὰ τὸ φίλον ὄντα ἡμέτερον παρεσ-
    χῆσθαι ἡμῖν τὰς καθ’ αὑτὸν χρείας μετὰ πάση(ς)
    εὐνοίας καὶ προθυμίας. Σὺ οὖν ἐπισκεψάμενος
    εἰ μὴ δέδοται ἄλλωι πρότερον αὕτη ἡ μερίς (;), πα-
    ράδειξον αὐτὴν καὶ τὴν πρὸς αὐτῆι χώραν Ἀρισ-                     40
    τοδικικίδηι[224] καὶ ἀπὸ τῆς βασιλικῆς χώρας τῆς ὁμο-
    ρούσης τῆι πρότερον δεδομένηι χώραι Ἀριστοδι-
    κίδηι σύνταξον καταμετρῆσαι καὶ παραδεῖξαι
    αὐτῶι πλέθρα δισχίλια καὶ ἐᾶσαι αὐτῶι προσενέγ-
    κασθαι πρὸς ἣν ἂμ βούληται πόλιν τῶν ἐν τῆι χώραι                 45
    τε καὶ συμμαχίαι· οἱ δὲ βασιλικοὶ λαοὶ οἱ ἐκ τοῦ τό-
    που, ἐν ὧι ἐστὶν ἡ Πέτρα, ἐὰμ βούλωνται οἰκεῖν ἐν τῆ(ι)
    Πέτραι ἀσφαλείας ἕνεκε, συντετάχαμεν Ἀριστο-
    τοδικίδηι[225] ἐᾶν αὐτοὺς οἰκεῖν.     ἔῤῥωσο.
    Βασιλεὺς Ἀντίοχος Μελεάγρωι χαίρειν. Ἐνέτυχεν ἡ-                  50
    μῖν Ἀριστοδικίδης, φάμενος Πέτραν τὸ χωρίον καὶ τὴ(γ)
    χώραν τὴν συγκυροῦσαν, περὶ ἧς πρότερον ἐγράψαμεν
    διδόντες αὐτῶι, οὐδ’ ἔτι καὶ νῦν παρειληφέναι, διὰ τὸ Ἀθη-
    ναίωι τῶι ἐπὶ τοῦ ναυστάθμου ἐπικεχωρῆσθαι, καὶ ἠξί-
    ωσεν ἀντὶ μὲν τῆς Πετρίτιδος χώρας παραδειχθῆνα(ι)                55
    αὐτῶι τὰ ἴσα πλέθρα, συγχωρηθῆναι δὲ καὶ ἄλλα πλέ-
    θρα δισχίλια προσενέγκασθαι πρὸς ἣν ἂμ βούληται
    τῶμ πόλεων τῶν ἐν τῆι ἡμετέραι συμμαχίαι, καθά-
    περ καὶ πρότερον ἐγράψαμεν. Ὁρῶντες οὖν αὐτὸν
    εὔνουν ὄντα καὶ πρόθυμον εἰς τὰ ἡμέτερα πράγμα-                   60
    τα, βουλόμεθα πολυωρεῖν τἀνθρώπου, καὶ περὶ
    τούτων συγκεχωρήκαμεν. Φησὶν δὲ εἶναι τῆς
    Πετρίτιδος χώρας τὰ συγχωρηθέντα αὐτῶι
    πλέθρα χίλια πεντακόσια. Σύνταξον οὖν κατα-
    μετρῆσαι Ἀριστοδικίδηι καὶ παραδεῖξαι γῆς                         65
    ἐργασίμου τά τε δισχίλια καὶ πεντακόσια πλέ-
    θρα καὶ ἀντὶ τῶν περὶ τὴν Πέτραν ἄλλα ἐργα-
    σίμου χίλια πεντακόσια ἀπὸ τῆς βασιλικῆς χώ-
    ρας τῆς συνοριζούσης τῆι ἐν ἀρχῆι δοθείσηι
    αὐτῶι παρ’ ἡμῶν· ἐᾶσαι δὲ καὶ προσενέγκασθαι                      70
    τὴν χώραν Ἀριστοδικίδην πρὸς ἣν ἂν βούληται
    πόλιν τῶν ἐν τῆι ἡμετέραι συμμαχίαι, καθά-
    περ καὶ ἐν τῆι πρότερον ἐπιστολῆι ἐγράψα-
    μεν. ἔῤῥωσο.


This inscription, the great historical value of which cannot be denied,
seems certainly to belong to the third century B.C., judging from the
subject as well as from the form of the letters, for the king Antiochus
repeatedly mentioned must either be Antiochus I., surnamed Soter (281 to
260 B.C.), or Antiochus III., the Great (222 to 186). Polybius, who was
born in 210 or 200 B.C., and died in 122 B.C., in his History (XXVIII.
1, and XXXI. 21) speaks indeed of a Meleager who lived in his time, and
was an ambassador of Antiochus Epiphanes, who reigned from 174 to 164,
and it is quite possible that this Meleager afterwards became satrap of
the satrapy of the Hellespont, and that, in this office, he wrote to the
Ilians the first letter of this inscription. But in the first letter of
Antiochus to his satrap Meleager, he gives him the option of assigning
to Aristodicides the 2000 plethra of land, either from the district
bordering upon the territory of Gergis or upon that of Scepsis. The town
of Gergis, however, according to Strabo, was destroyed by king Attalus
I. of Pergamus, who reigned from 241 to 197 B.C., and who transplanted
the inhabitants to the neighbourhood of the sources of the Caïcus in
Mysia. These sources, however, as Strabo himself says, are situated very
far from Mount Ida, and hence also from Ilium. Two thousand plethra of
land at such a distance could not have been of any use to the Ilians;
consequently, it is impossible to believe that the inscription can be
speaking of the new town of Gergitha, which was rising to importance at
the sources of the Caïcus. I now perfectly agree with Mr. Frank
Calvert,[226] and with Consul von Hahn,[227] that the site of Gergis is
indicated by the ruins of the small town and acropolis at the extreme
end of the heights behind Bunarbashi, which was only a short time ago
regarded by most archæologists as the site of the Homeric Troy. This
site of Gergis, in a direct line between Ilium and Scepsis, the ruins of
which are to be seen further away on the heights of Mount Ida, agrees
perfectly with the inscription. Livy (XXXV. 43) gives an account of the
visit of Antiochus III., the Great. I also find in the ‘Corpus
Inscriptionum Græcarum,’ No. 3596, that the latter had a general called
Meleager, who may subsequently have become satrap of the Hellespont. On
the other hand, Chishull, in his ‘Antiquitates Asiaticæ,’ says that
Antiochus I., Soter, on an expedition with his fleet against the King of
Bithynia, stopped at the town of Sigeum, which lay near Ilium, and that
the king went up to Ilium with the queen, who was his wife and sister,
and with the great dignitaries and his suite. There is, indeed, nothing
said of the brilliant reception which was there prepared for him, but
there is an account of the reception which was arranged for him in
Sigeum. The Sigeans lavished servile flattery upon him, and not only did
they send ambassadors to congratulate him, but the Senate also passed a
decree, in which they praised the king’s actions to the skies, and
proclaimed that public prayers should be offered up to the Ilian Athena,
to Apollo (who was regarded as his ancestor), to the goddess of Victory
and to other deities, for his and his consort’s welfare; that the
priestesses and priests, the senators and all the magistrates of the
town should carry wreaths, and that all the citizens and all the
strangers settled or temporarily residing in Sigeum should publicly
extol the virtues and the bravery of the great king; further, that a
gold equestrian statue of the king, standing on a pedestal of white
marble, should be erected in the temple of Athena in Sigeum, and that it
should bear the inscription: “The Sigeans have erected this statue to
King Antiochus, the son of Seleucus, for the devotion he has shown to
the temple, and because he is the benefactor and the saviour of the
people; this mark of honour is to be proclaimed in the popular
assemblies and at the public games.” However, in this wilderness it is
impossible for me to find out from which ancient classic writer this
episode has been taken.

It is very probable that a similar reception awaited Antiochus I. in
Ilium, so that he kept the city in good remembrance. That he cherished
kindly feelings towards the Ilians is proved also by the inscription No.
3595 in the ‘Corpus Inscriptionum Græcarum.’ But whether it is he or
Antiochus the Great that is referred to in the inscription I do not
venture to decide.

Aristodicides, of Assos, who is frequently mentioned in the inscription,
is utterly unknown, and this name occurs here for the first time; the
name of the place Petra also, which is mentioned several times in the
inscription, is quite unknown; it must have been situated in this
neighbourhood, but all my endeavours to discover it in the modern
Turkish names of the localities, or by other means, have been made in
vain.

The other inscription runs as follows:--

                                    ΩΝΙΟΥΤΟΥΕΥΔ
              ΟΣΜΕΝ                 ΟΥΚΑΜΕΝΑΧΟΣΓΛΑΥΚΟ
    ΕΠΕΓΡΑΨΑΜΕΝΕΙΣΣΤΗΛΗΝΚΑΤΑΤΟΝΝΟΜΟΝΕΡΓΟΦΙΛΟΝΠΑΤΡΟΣΟΥ
    ΧΡΗΜΑΤΙΣΖΗΕΖΗΜΙΩΜΕΝΟΝΥΠΟΤΩΝΠΡΟΤΑΝΕΩΝΤΩΝΠΕΡΙΔΙΟ
    ΦΑΝΗΝΗΓΗΣΙΔΗΜΟΥΟΦΙΛΟΝΤΑΤΟΥΣΚΑΤΑΤΟΝΝΟΜΟΝΣΤΑΤΗΡΑΣΔΥΟ                 5
    ΚΑΙΜΗΝΟΓΕΝΗΝΜΝΗΣΑΡΧΟΥΚΑΙΑΡΤΕΜΙΔΩΡΟΝΦΑΝΙΑΚΑΙΔΙΟΜΗΔΗΝ
    ΑΠΟΛΛΩΝΙΟΥΕΖΗΜΙΩΜΕΝΟΥΣΥΠΟΤΩΝΠΡΥΤΑΝΕΩΝΤΩΝΠΕΡΙΔΙΟΦΑΝΗΝ
    ΗΓΗΣΙΔΗΜΟΥΥΠΟΗΜΕΡΑΣΤΡΕΙΣΟΦΙΛΟΝΤΑΣΕΚΑΣΤΟΝΑΥΤΩΝΣΤΑΤΗΡΑΣΔΥΟ
    ΜΗΝΟΔΟΤΟΝΜΗΝΟΔΟΤΟΥΚΑΙΗΡΑΚΛΕΙΔΗΝΚΑΙΜΗΝΟΔΟΤΟΝΤΟΥΣΗΡΑΚΛΕΙ
    ΔΟΥΕΖΗΜΙΩΜΕΝΟΥΣΥΠΟΤΩΝΠΕΡΙΦΑΙΝΩΝΑΚΤΑΕΥΔΗΜΟΥΠΡΥΤΑ                   10
    ΝΕΩΝΟΦΙΛΟΝΤΑΕΚΑΣΤΟΝΑΥΤΩΝΣΤΑΤΗΡΑΣΔΥΟ
    ΑΡΤΕΜΙΔΩΡΟΝΜΗΝΟΦΑΝΤΟΥΕΖΗΜΙΩΜΕΝΟΝΥΠΟΤΩΝΝΟ
    ΜΟΦΥΛΑΚΩΝΤΩΝΠΕΡΙΙΠΠΑΡΧΟΝΗΓΗΣΙΔΗΜΟΥΟΦΙΛΟΝ
    ΤΑΣΤΑΤΗΡΑΣΔΥΟ

         ........................
    ...................ωνίου τοῦ Εὐδ....
    ......οσμεν.........ουκαμεναχος γλαυκο..
    ἐπεγράψαμεν εἰς στήλην κατὰ τὸν νόμον Ἐργόφιλον Πατρόσου (;)
    Χρήματις[228] ζη[229] ἐζημιωμένον ὑπὸ τῶν προτάνεων[230] τῶν περὶ Διο-
    φάνην Ἡγησιδήμου, ὀ(φ)ίλοντα τοὺς κατ(ὰ) τὸν νόμον στατῆρας δύο    5
    καὶ Μηνογένην Μνησ(άρχ;)ου καὶ Ἀρτεμίδωρον Φανία καὶ Διομήδην
    Ἀπολλωνίου, ἐζημιωμένους ὑπὸ τῶν πρυτάνεων τῶν περὶ Διοφά(νην)
    Ἡγησιδήμου ὑπὸ ἡμέρας τρεῖς ὀφίλοντας ἕκαστον αὐτῶν στατῆρας δύο.
    Μηνόδοτον Μηνοδότου καὶ Ἡρακλείδην καὶ Μηνόδοτον τοὺς Ἡρακλεί-
    δου ἐζημιωμένους ὑπὸ τῶν περὶ Φαινώνακτα Εὐδήμου πρυτά-           10
    νεων, ὀφείλοντα ἕκαστον αὐτῶν στατῆρας δύο.
    Ἀρτεμίδωρον Μηνοφάντον ἐζημιωμένον ὑπὸ τῶν νο-
    μοφυλάκων τῶν περὶ Ἵππαρχον Ἡγησιδήμου, ὀφίλον-
    τα στατῆρας δύο.

In the inscription quoted in the ‘Corpus Inscriptionum Græcarum’ under
No. 3604, which is admitted to belong to the time of Augustus
Octavianus, Hipparchus is mentioned as a member of the Ilian Council,
and as on line 13 the same name occurs with the same attribute, I do not
hesitate to maintain that the above inscription belongs to the same
period.




CHAPTER XVII.

     Spring weather in the Plain of Troy--The Greek Temple of
     Athena--Numerous fragments of sculpture--Reservoir of the
     temple--Excavation of the Tower--Difficulties of the work--Further
     discoveries of walls--Stone implements at small depths--Important
     distinction between the plain and decorated whorls--Greek and Roman
     coins--Absence of iron--Copper nails: their peculiar forms:
     probably dress and hair pins: some with heads and beads of gold and
     electrum--Original height of the Tower--Discovery of a Greek
     house--Various types of whorls--Further remarks on the Greek
     bas-relief--It belonged to the temple of Apollo--Stones from the
     excavations used for building in the villages around--Fever.


Pergamus of Troy, March 15th, 1873.

Since my report of the 1st of this month I have continued the
excavations with great zeal, favoured by glorious weather and an
abundance of workmen. The nights are cold, and the thermometer still
frequently falls to freezing point towards morning, whereas during the
day the heat of the sun is already beginning to be troublesome, the
thermometer often showing 18° Réaumur (72½° Fahrenheit) in the shade
at midday. The leaves of the trees are only now beginning to sprout,
while the Plain is already covered with spring flowers.[231] For the
last fortnight we have heard the croaking of millions of frogs in the
surrounding marshes, and during the last eight days the storks have
returned. One of the discomforts of our life in this wilderness is the
hideous shrieking of the innumerable owls which build their nests in the
holes of the walls of my excavations; their shrieks sound mysterious and
horrible, and are especially unendurable at night.

I have proceeded with the excavation of the site of the Temple of Athena
with the greatest energy. The foundations of this sanctuary nowhere
extend deeper than 2 meters (6½ feet), and generally only to 1 meter
(3¼ feet). The floor, which consists of large slabs of sandstone, and
which rests upon double layers of large hewn blocks of the same stone,
is frequently covered only with a foot, and never with more than 3¼
feet, of vegetable soil; this explains the total absence of entire
sculptures. For whatever sculptures there were in or upon the temple
could not sink into the ground on the summit of the hill, and they
therefore remained lying on the surface for many centuries, till they
were destroyed by religious zeal or wantonness. This, and this alone,
explains the enormous mass of fragments of statues which cover the
entire hill.

I find, however, a great number of large sculptured blocks of marble in
the Corinthian style which are difficult to destroy, and the removal of
which causes me great trouble and loss of time. As the Tower, which I
partly uncovered last year, extends directly below the temple at a great
depth, and as I wish at all events to lay bare its entire breadth, I
shall leave only the ruins of the north and south walls of the temple
standing, and break away all the rest, except a reservoir, 27 feet long
and 26 feet broad, which is in the sanctuary, and is built of blocks of
limestone laid together without cement or lime, and the walls of which
have a thickness of 8 feet. The four aqueducts mentioned in my last
report empty themselves into the reservoir. I shall leave it standing in
order to give visitors to the Troad a faint idea of the trouble which I
have to take in removing all the stones of a temple which is about 288
feet long and 72½ feet broad. But what is even much more difficult
than the removal of the stones, is the carrying off of the _débris_, for
as the excavation is made on the flat earth, this can only be effected
by side paths, which become steeper the deeper we dig. However, I only
wish to uncover the top of the ruined Tower, for to bring it to light
down to the primary soil is a piece of work to which my patience is
unequal. This new large cutting, therefore, only requires a depth of 26
feet, and on the western end I have given it a breadth of 78¾ feet.
By this means I hope to reach the ancient and highly important monument
on the north side in two or three days. As soon as this is done, I shall
have an upper and a lower terrace made for facilitating the removal of
the rubbish, and shall thus in a month from to-day be able to finish the
entire excavation of the Tower as far as its eastern end, which I came
upon yesterday in my steep cutting at the south-eastern corner of the
Pergamus, and of which I have laid open a breadth of 13 feet. This
eastern side of the Tower, thus brought to light, runs down at an angle
of 60 degrees, and has the same appearance as the ancient buttress which
I uncovered at the north side of the Pergamus. As I did not at first
think that it was the Tower, I had the first layer of stones broken off,
but I soon found a piece of masonry composed of large stones joined with
earth. In consequence of this I have entirely stopped the works in this
cutting, which already extended to a length of 111½ feet, and in
spite of its small breadth was one of the most difficult works in Troy.
For, as already said, I had first to break through a wall 10 feet thick,
consisting of large blocks of marble, but principally of Corinthian
pillars joined with lime (see p. 239); then the wall of Lysimachus,
which was also 10 feet thick, and built of large hewn stones. The large
drums of pillars had to be rolled up the steep path and then carried
off; the large hewn stones had to be broken with hammers and then
removed in wheel-barrows. In addition to this, as the visitors to the
Pergamus may see in the walls of this cutting, we had to cut through
two Trojan walls, the first of which is 5¼ feet thick, and the second
10 feet; both consist of stones joined with earth. The first of these
walls is directly below a portion of the western wall of the
comparatively modern Temple of Athena, and as--according to my pocket
compass--it runs due E.S.E.1/2E., I at first thought that it might
belong to the ancient diminutive temple of the Ilian tutelary goddess,
which Alexander the Great[232] found here. But nothing further has
appeared which could help to prove this. The second wall, 10 feet thick,
is extremely interesting, for it is built of large unhewn blocks of
shelly limestone (_Muschelkalk_), and on the top of it is a wall of
small stones joined with earth. It evidently belongs to a much later
age, but was in any case built long before the arrival of the Greek
colony in Ilium. But even the lower wall of large stones was not built
till the Tower of Ilium had formed a heap of _débris_ 20 feet high; it
must therefore have been built centuries after the erection of the
Tower. This _débris_ consists of ashes mixed with bones and small
shells, and on account of its dampness and toughness is just as
difficult to break down as damp limestone rock. In it I found many
fragments of those Trojan vessels, which are of a brilliant red or black
colour, both outside and inside, but nothing else of any interest. Above
the Tower, at the east side of the Pergamus, there is nothing but yellow
wood-ashes and a great number of stones. In fact, down to the present
depth of 4½ meters (14¼ feet) below the surface, that is, from 7
to 10 feet below the foundations of the temple of Athena, I find nothing
but yellow wood-ashes, and among these an immense number of enormous
earthen jars (πίθοι) from 3¼ to 6½ feet long, and pointed below,
which must have served not only as wine and water jars, but as cellars
for keeping provisions, for there are no walled cellars.

Stone implements, such as I found in my former excavations only below a
depth of 13 feet (with the exception of the few knives of silex), are
met with here in great numbers at as small a depth as 6½ feet, that
is, directly below the Temple of Athena; those most frequently found are
clumsy hammers of diorite, but occasionally also hammers of the same or
of green stone very prettily worked; some of them have a wide hole at
both sides and a narrow one in the middle, and I cannot understand how a
handle could have been fixed into them. The best finished instrument is
always the wedge,[233] which is of diorite or of hard green stone,
sometimes also of white silex, and occurs in all sizes from about ¾ of
an inch to above 5 inches in length. This instrument is always of such
exquisite workmanship and so well polished, that it is really
astonishing how it was possible, with the miserable means at the
disposal of those times, to make anything of such an excellent quality,
for a modern artist with the best instruments could not possibly make
better ones. The knives of silex, which I found last year in such great
quantities, are as yet but rarely met with in this excavation. As stone
implements do not occur elsewhere before reaching a depth of 4 meters
(13 feet), it is probable that the numbers of stone implements met with
here, as early as at a depth of 2 meters (6½ feet) on the site of the
temple, belong to the _débris_ which was dug up when the large reservoir
was constructed, for it appears to extend pretty far down, and its
foundations may perhaps reach down to the Tower.

As, even in the temple itself, I find exclusively the round terra-cottas
in the form of cones and _without_ decorations, while, on the other
hand, below the foundations of the temple I meet with great quantities
of them in the form of volcanoes and tops, with the most various Aryan
religious symbols, I am now of the opinion _that all those bearing such
Aryan symbols must belong to the tribes which preceded the Greek colony
on this site_.

Of moulds of mica-schist I have only found two, one of which was used on
all the six sides for casting weapons and instruments, the other for
casting headless nails, and has two round holes, not perforated, for
what purpose I do not know.[234]

While speaking of implements, I must mention a very remarkable hammer of
bone, found at a depth of 3 meters (10 feet), which is covered with
little engraved stars.

We again met with several marble idols, with the engraved owl’s face of
the Ilian Athena and her girdle with dots; also a very pretty marble
idol without the owl’s head, but with two small arms extended
horizontally. The only terra-cottas with owls’ heads that have been met
with, since my last report, are two cups (vase-covers).

I find very many copper coins of Ilium and Alexandria Troas, and Roman
ones from the time of Augustus to Constantine the Great, especially the
latter, directly below the surface, and at most down to a meter (3¼
feet) deep. Iron I do not find at all, not even in the temple, but a
number of copper nails, which, however, I begin to think could not have
been used for driving into wood; for this purpose they seem to be far
too long and thin. The usual length of the nails occurring below 6½
feet is from about 4 to above 6 inches, with a thickness of 1/5 of an
inch, and I do not think that it would be possible to drive such a nail
even into very soft wood. Besides this, most of the nails have no head
at all, others two heads, and many have two pointed ends, one of which
is bent round so as to form a head. Thick copper nails suitable for
driving into wood are very rarely met with; I have only found two in two
years. I am therefore induced to believe that all the nails which I find
in the strata of the nations preceding the Greeks have been used only as
dress or hair pins. This belief is confirmed by a copper nail, about 5
inches long, with a head of the usual form, and the fragment of a
similar nail, which were found only 3 inches below the surface, in a
small groove, which my men had made round their reed-hut to allow the
rain-water to run off. On the head of the nail there is a small gold
ball, and then there follows downwards on the nail a row of eighteen
similar little gold balls. At the end of this row there is a second row
of nine gold balls of like size. The rows of the little balls are in the
form of necklaces, and cover a third part of the nail. The fragment of
the other nail is still more remarkable, for it shows a string of little
balls which form a perfect bow; they are made of the alloy which in
antiquity was called _electrum_ (ἤλεκτρον), consisting of three parts of
gold and one part of silver; below the bow, in a horizontal direction,
there is a row of little balls, which are probably intended to represent
the string. The little balls are firmly soldered to both of the nails.
In addition to this I must also mention that the silver nails so
frequently met with are generally of the same form and size as the
copper ones, and can certainly never have been used for driving into
wood.

On the west side of the Great Tower, which I laid bare last year, I am
likewise making an excavation 47 feet long and 48 feet broad, so as to
bring to light more of this side, and to see how the walls of Ilium are
connected with it. It is worth a journey round the world to see this
Tower, whose site was at all events so high, that it not only commanded
a view of the Plain, but also of the plateau lying to the south of it,
whereas its summit now lies a great many feet below the level of the
plateau. According to this it seems that the accumulation of _débris_ on
the site of the city is as large as it is in the Pergamus.[235]

In the western excavation, already mentioned, I found the ruins of a
very large house of the Greek period. It extended to the depth of 6½
feet, and must have belonged to a rich man, for the floors of the rooms
are made of large red slabs splendidly polished. In it I found two small
and very pretty female heads of terra-cotta, as well as two extremely
remarkable pieces of hard brittle black stone, like glass, in the form
of mushrooms, but with a tube running through the centre. The heads of
the two pieces have decorations similar to those on the round
terra-cottas in the form of humming-tops and volcanoes, and I therefore
believe that both pieces belong to the pre-Hellenic period.

Below the foundations of the Greek house I found, at the depth of 3 and
4 meters (9¾ to 13 feet), many of the whorls with the usual
decorations of four, five, or six double or treble rising suns; or four
flaming altars; or four _Rosæ mysticæ_; or four or five 卐 in the circle
around the central sun. I likewise found, at a depth of 10 feet, one of
these articles, upon which there is a very rude and inartistic engraving
of the Ilian Athena, with the owl’s head and outstretched arms. By the
side of this representation there are two crosses, and at the four ends
of each are the marks of the nails with which our forefathers fastened
the two pieces of wood which were laid crosswise for igniting the holy
fire. In the same circle with the image of the goddess there are two
symbols of lightning. A faithful drawing of this terra-cotta is given in
the cut.

[Illustration: No. 172. A Whorl with rude Symbols of the Owl’s Face,
Suastika, and lightning (3 M.).]

Of the earthenware found in this excavation there is one piece
especially deserving of attention. This is a vessel in the form of a
helmet, with a round hole at the bottom; it may have served as a kind of
funnel.

As has been already said, the splendid block of triglyphs representing
Phœbus Apollo with the four horses of the Sun, which I discovered last
July, must, as the triglyph on the left side proves, have stood over the
entrance of the temple, probably on its propylæa, and must have had
another block of triglyphs of the same size on its right side. It would
be of the greatest interest to archæology if I should find the second
block of triglyphs, which, as happened with the other block, has
probably been thrown from the summit of the hill down the steep
declivity. I have also previously expressed the opinion, that the block
of triglyphs which I saved had been thrown down by fanatical Turks
because it represented living creatures, which is strictly prohibited in
the Koran. However, the locality has not been inhabited at all since the
ninth century, and the labourers of the distant Turkish villages cannot
possibly have given themselves the trouble of rolling down from the hill
such tremendous weights from mere religious zeal. Besides this, the good
state in which the sculpture has been preserved proves that it cannot
possibly have stood upon the top of the hill up to the time of the
Turkish invasion, and this leads me to suppose that it was thrown down
by the early Christians more than a thousand years before, very likely
even in the fourth century A.D.; for it is well known, that all
sculptures of heathen gods which were difficult to destroy they simply
hurled from the top of the hills upon which they stood. That this is the
only true explanation is also confirmed by the covering of earth, 3¼
feet thick, which enveloped the sculpture on the declivity of the hill.
According to the average accumulation of the soil in this locality, the
formation of such a covering would be impossible in the course of three
or four centuries: it would have required more than a thousand years.

It is now quite certain that the Doric temple, which at one time stood
on the north side, and in the depths of which I have so long been
working, was the sanctuary of Apollo; and that the block of Doric
triglyphs so frequently mentioned belonged to this temple of Apollo, and
to none other; since Ilium’s great temple, which I am now investigating,
could only have been dedicated to the tutelary goddess of Ilium, Athena,
for in the great inscription quoted in my last report it is simply
called “τὸ ἱερόν.”

In order to try to find the second block of triglyphs, I have since
yesterday set 25 men to work upwards from the foot of the hill at the
point where the Phœbus Apollo was found, over a breadth of 59 feet, to
remove the _débris_ which unfortunately I had thrown down the declivity
last year, and which forms a covering of 23 feet in thickness; and then
to dig away the whole steep side of the hill to a depth of 4½ feet
from the bottom upwards.

As soon as I have workmen to spare, I shall also employ thirty to make a
deep cutting into the theatre, the stage of which, as already said, is
197 feet broad; this cutting I intend to make 33 feet broad and 148 feet
long; for, in a small opening which I made there last year, I found a
number of fragments of broken statues, and it is quite possible that
some, which might be of the greatest interest to archæology, escaped the
zeal of the early Christians.

The many thousands of stones which I bring out of the depths of Ilium
have induced the inhabitants of the surrounding villages to erect
buildings which might be called grand for the inhabitants of this
wilderness. Among others, they are at present building with my Ilian
stones a mosque and a minaret in the wretched Turkish village of
Chiplak, and a church-tower in the Christian village of Yenishehr. A
number of two-wheeled carts, drawn by oxen, are always standing by the
side of my excavations, ready to receive the stones which can be of any
use as soon as they have been brought to the surface; but the religious
zeal of these good people is not great enough for them to offer to help
me in the terrible work of breaking the large, splendidly hewn blocks so
as to make them more convenient to remove.

Although spring is only just commencing, there is already a great deal
of malignant fever in consequence of the mild winter, and the poor
people of the neighbourhood are already daily beginning to make large
claims upon my stock of quinine.

I found myself obliged to raise the men’s wages to 10 piasters or 2
francs, eight days ago.

[Illustration: No. 173. Splendid Trojan Vase of Terra-cotta,
representing the tutelary Goddess of Ilium, θεὰ γλαυκῶπις Ἀθήνη. The
cover forms the helmet. (8 M.)]9

[Illustration: Altar and Reservoir PLATE IX.

UPPER PART OF THE BUILDINGS DISCOVERED IN THE DEPTHS OF THE TEMPLE OF
ATHENA.

_Page 259_.]




CHAPTER XVIII.

     Weather and progress of the work--The lion-headed handle of a
     sceptre--Lions formerly in the Troad--Various objects
     found--Pottery--Implements of stone and copper--Whorls--Balls
     curiously decorated--Fragments of musical instruments--Remains of
     house-walls--The storks of the Troad.


Pergamus of Troy, March 22nd, 1873.

During this last week we have again had constant splendid weather, and,
with 150 men on an average, I have got through a good piece of work. On
the north side of the excavation on the site of the Temple of Athena, I
have already reached a depth of 26 feet, and have laid bare the Tower in
several places. The space to be dug down is now divided into four
terraces, and I am having the lowest terrace, which forms the surface of
the Tower, worked with especially great energy. As the paths are getting
both steeper and longer, the men with the wheelbarrows have now to stop
and rest half-way, so the work proceeds more slowly every day. Still I
hope that I shall bring to light the whole breadth of the Tower in the
eastern direction in three weeks, but the western side in a week and a
half. The only part of the interior of the Temple of Athena which I have
left standing is the reservoir built of large white stones without
cement, which, owing to my excavations, will in a few days be 26 feet
above the Tower, and will have a very pretty appearance. It is only by
excavating the west side of that part of the Great Tower which I
uncovered last year, that I shall be able to judge in what direction the
walls run out from it, and what my next work will be. The most
remarkable of the objects found this week is certainly a large knob
belonging to a stick, of the purest and finest crystal, and in the form
of a very beautifully wrought lion’s head; it was discovered upon the
Tower at a depth of 26 feet. It must have been the ornament of a
Trojan’s staff or sceptre (σκῆπτρον), for I found it among those
brilliant red and black fragments of pottery, which only occur at a
depth of from 36 to 46 feet, except upon the Tower. Not only this lion’s
head, but the illustrations drawn from the lion, which occur repeatedly
in the Iliad, make it seem extremely probable that in remote antiquity
lions existed in this neighbourhood. Homer could not possibly have
described so excellently the characteristics of this animal, had he not
had frequent opportunity of watching them, and his geographical
knowledge of southern countries is too slight for us to suppose that he
had visited them, and had there become intimately acquainted with the
characteristics of the lion. Not far from the lion’s head I found a
splendidly cut hexagon of the purest crystal, as well as a small
pyramid, 1½ inch long and broad, and 1-2/3 inch high, made of black,
white and blue streaked marble, such as is not found in this district;
the hole which runs through the centre of the pyramid is filled with
lead.

[Illustration: No. 174.

A Lion-Headed Sceptre-handle of the finest crystal: found on the Tower
(8 M.).]

I also found upon the Tower a very primitive marble idol, 7½ inches
in length, 3-1/3 inches broad, and 1-1/5 inch thick; also a very fine
copper lance; further, a large mould of mica-schist for casting twelve
different weapons and instruments, as well as a beautiful sling-bullet
made of loadstone. In the higher strata, and in fact at a depth of 4
meters (13 feet), the most curious article certainly is an idol of the
Trojan tutelary goddess made of slate, such as has never hitherto been
found. It shows the owl’s face, two breasts and a navel, and long hair
at the back of the head; two horizontal lines on the neck, which are
joined by small cross lines, seem to denote armour. Marble idols without
the owl’s face, but otherwise of exactly the same form as those with the
owl’s face, are met with in numbers in all the strata between 3 and 8
meters deep (10 to 26 feet). I likewise found long, thin copper nails
with round heads at the thick end, or without heads, but with the end
bent round, which I now perceive can only be breast or hair pins, and
not actual nails for driving into wood. I find them also in quantities
in the strata of this excavation between 4 and 7 meters deep (13 to 23
feet), and I must therefore decidedly pronounce that the people to whom
these strata of ruins belong were acquainted with copper.

[Illustration: No. 175. A Mould of Mica-schist, for casting various
metal Instruments (Tower, 8 M.).]

[Illustration: No. 176. A curious Instrument of Copper (3 M.).]

[Illustration: No. 177. A perforated and grooved piece of Mica-schist,
probably for supporting a Spit. Found on the Tower (8 M.).]

A strange instrument of copper, almost in the shape of a horse’s bit,
but with two pointed hooks, was found at a depth of 10 feet. Besides
this, we met with two somewhat crooked copper knives, at from 13 to
16½ feet down, as well as a small but very fine knife, in the form of
a saw, made of a shell. Stone instruments are continually met with here
in great numbers in all of the strata between 2 and 8 meters deep (6½
to 26 feet), whereas in my excavations of 1871 and 1872 I only found
them below a depth of 13 feet. Two beautiful stone lances, one of
diorite, the other of hard green stone, were found, the one at 20 feet
down, the other at 11½ feet. During this week, I also found very many
knives of silex in the form of saws or of sharp blades, with one or two
edges; further, a very prettily cut piece of mica-schist with a
perforated hole and a groove on the upper side, which may have been
fastened to a fireplace and have served for turning a spit.

[Illustration: No. 178. A large Terra-cotta Vase, with two large Handles
and two small Handles or Rings (5 M.).]

I have observed that the terra-cottas here generally occur in great
numbers only in and below those strata of _débris_ which are mixed with
enormous quantities of small shells, and which usually commence at a
depth of 13 feet, but sometimes not till 20 feet. However, every now and
then we come upon beautiful terra-cottas above these shell strata; and
thus, for instance, in the great cutting, directly in front of my door,
we found, at a depth of 10 feet, several large and splendid vessels,
among which was an extremely elegant black vase, in the shape of a
soup-tureen, and at a depth of 11½ feet two mixing-bowls, the smaller
one of which has two, the larger one four, handles; the larger
mixing-bowl is two feet high, and its orifice is as much in diameter.
(See Cut, No. 41, p. 74.) At a depth of 16½ feet I found an extremely
curious large vase, which has two large handles at the top and two small
ones at the sides. Various other vases of extremely curious forms were
discovered at a depth of from 13 to 26 feet; of them I will only mention
one large brilliant black vase with two female breasts and two handles,
by the side of which are the stumps of the upraised arms which
ornamented this vessel. The upper part of it, which, as is proved by the
arms and breasts, was ornamented with the owl’s head of the Ilian
Athena, is unfortunately wanting. It is strange that this vase has no
navel.

Of the large and brilliant red goblets in the form of huge
champagne-glasses, with two immense handles, we met with many in a more
or less broken condition at a depth of from 6 to 8 meters (20 to 26
feet); among them is an enormous goblet 15¾ inches long, of which I
have been able to collect all the fragments and shall therefore be able
to restore it. (See No. 112, p. 158.)

I found, at a depth of from 23 to 26 feet, quantities of earthen plates,
some of which are of a brilliant red colour, but most of them are
uncoloured. At a depth of 20 feet I found a fragment of pottery with a
cross, at the four ends of which are dots, which can only indicate the
nails by means of which it was fastened. Small terra-cotta whorls, with
Aryan religious symbols, were again found in great numbers; several of
them have decorations not hitherto met with. Of terra-cotta balls we
have found three during these last days, two of them are very
remarkable. One hemisphere of the first has nineteen figures like the
Greek letter Rho (Ρ) in a circle round it, and ten of the same figures
in a line through the middle point, also a number of little stars; the
other hemisphere is entirely filled with little stars. The second ball
has a half moon on the one hemisphere and large stars on the other.

[Illustration: No. 179. A remarkable Terra-cotta Ball (6 M.).]

[Illustration: No. 180. A finely engraved Ivory Tube, probably part of a
Flute. Found on the Tower (8 M.).]

Among the remarkable objects found during the week, I must also mention
a splendidly ornamented piece of ivory, from a depth of 8 meters (26
feet), which is almost the shape of a flute, and may have been used as
such; further, a flat bone, which has one hole at the one end and three
at the other, and seems certainly to have belonged to a musical
instrument.

I sometimes find here house-walls built of stones joined with mere
earth, which must certainly have been erected long before the Greek
settlement, but which rise to within a meter (3¼ feet) of the
surface; in fact in the great cutting in front of my house, I have
pierced through two such walls 6½ feet thick, which here formed the
corner of a house, and which reach up to within a foot of the surface;
they appear to extend pretty far down, and in my next letter I shall be
able to give more details about them.

Although the Pergamus, whose depths I have been ransacking, borders
directly upon the marshes formed by the Simoïs, in which there are
always hundreds of storks, yet none of them ever settle down here. Upon
one of my wooden houses and upon the stone one I had two comfortable
nests made for them, but although there are sometimes twelve storks’
nests upon one roof in some of the surrounding Turkish villages, yet
none will settle on mine; it is probably too cold and stormy for the
little storks on “Ἴλιος ἠνεμόεσσα.”

[Illustration: No. 181. Knob for a Stick, of fine marble (3 M.).]

[Illustration: No. 182. Bone handle of a Trojan’s Staff or Sceptre,
σκῆπτρον (7 M.).[236]]




CHAPTER XIX.

     Splendid vases found on the Tower--Other articles--Human skull,
     bones, and ashes, found in an urn--New types of whorls--Greek
     votive discs of diorite--Moulds of mica-schist--The smaller
     quantity of copper than of stone implements explained--Discussion
     of the objection, that stone implements are not mentioned by
     Homer--Reply to Mr. Calvert’s article--Flint knives found in the
     Acropolis of Athens--A narrow escape from fire.


Pergamus of Troy, March 29th, 1873.

Since my report of the 22nd of this month I have unfortunately made
little or no progress, for most of the villagers are trimming their
vineyards during this week; and besides this, we have been tormented by
a horrible icy-cold high north wind, which yesterday and to-day rendered
it impossible to carry on the works.

[Illustration: No. 183. A brilliant Black Vase, with the Symbols of the
Ilian Athena, from the Tower (8 M.).]

[Illustration: No. 184. Vase-cover with Handle in shape of a Coronet (8
M.).]

[Illustration: No. 185. Vase-cover with a Human Face: found on the Tower
(8 M.).]

[Illustration: No. 186. Flat piece of Gold, in the Form of an
Arrow-head: from the Tower (8 M.).]

[Illustration: No. 187. Prettily decorated Tube of Ivory. From the Tower
(8 M.).]

But in spite of this, during the week we have found at a depth of 8
meters (26 feet), and upon the Tower, a great number of splendid vases
of the most remarkable form; they are indeed all in a more or less
broken condition, but they can easily be mended, as I have all the
pieces. Those especially deserving of being mentioned are a brilliant
black vase with two large female breasts, a large navel, and with two
mighty upraised arms (No. 183); further, a vase 33¾ inches high, in a
good state of preservation; a large mixing bowl (κρατήρ) with two
handles, and a smaller vase, round below, with four handles of two
different forms. Among the smaller vessels there are, especially
deserving of attention, a brilliant black cup cover, with a handle in
the form of a coronet, and a brilliant red cover, with a very curious
human face, in which the features of the owl cannot be mistaken. (Nos.
184, 185, p. 268.) Of the other articles, I can only mention a little
plate of gold in the form of an arrow-head, with a small hole at the
lower end (No. 186); an ivory tube with very curious decorations (No.
187); and a well-preserved skull with neat little teeth, which I
discovered, together with a few bones and a quantity of human ashes, in
a vase (unfortunately broken) 27½ inches high and broad, at a depth
of 26 feet, upon the Tower. This is the first time that I have found
such well-preserved human bones and even a skull in an urn. Funereal
urns, indeed, we dig out daily, but the bodies are always completely
burnt to ashes; and, with the exception of the skeleton (already
described) of an embryo found in a vase at a depth of 51 feet upon the
primary rock, I have hitherto never found an entire bone in a funereal
urn. The vase in which I found the skull is made of that excellent
Trojan terra-cotta which I find only at a depth of from 36 to 46 and
52½ feet, except upon the Tower; the skull must have belonged to a
Trojan woman, for it is too delicate to have been the skull of a man. In
the same urn I also found a copper hair or dress pin. Upon the Tower we
also met with two marble idols without owls’ faces, one of which is 6
inches long, the other 6-1/3 inches. We likewise discovered quantities
of terra-cotta whorls with symbolical decorations, twelve of which are
of types not previously found. One is the form of a shirt stud,[237]
1-1/3 inch high and 1-1/5 inch broad, with the never-failing perforated
hole and an engraved flower, the four petals of which form a cross round
the central point; in three of the petals there are very large dots,
which may denote suns or moons; upon another, in the form of a top,
there are six trees in the circle, the top and the foot of which are
alternately directed to the central sun.[238]

I have already repeatedly mentioned the terra-cotta discs, between 1 and
2 inches in diameter, thick in the middle and cut smooth on one side, in
the shape of a Greek lamp; they always have at one side two very small
perforated holes, and frequently a round or oval potter’s stamp, in
which one can recognise either an altar and a bee with outspread wings,
or a swan, an ox, a horse, a man, or something of the kind. I have also
said that these discs must have belonged to the Greek colony, for I
generally find them quite close to the surface as far down as 3¼ feet
and rarely below 6½ feet, and besides this the fine and almost
microscopical figures in the stamp show a Greek style of art.[239] The
small holes at the sides leave no doubt that the articles have been used
as votive offerings to be hung up in the temples or beside the idols.
These discs, which have hitherto only occurred in terra-cotta, I have
this week found at a depth of 1 meter (3¼ feet), made of diorite with
two holes on one side, which, however, are not perforated; owing to the
hardness of the substance it was no doubt found difficult to make the
two perforations.

During the last few days we have again found upon the Tower, at a depth
of 8 meters (26 feet), a mould of mica-schist, 11 inches long, upon five
sides of which there are forms for casting twelve, lances, knives, and
extremely curious implements, the use of which is a puzzle to me.

The many stone moulds for casting weapons, knives, and implements, which
are met with here, sufficiently prove that Troy possessed a number of
copper weapons, knives, and instruments. It is, however, quite natural
that I should find comparatively few of them, for the copper implements
could of course easily be melted down and re-cast, and it must not even
be supposed that I shall find any except those which were lost in the
tumult of battle, or were preserved amidst the destruction of the city.
Therefore the fact that I find immensely larger numbers of silex knives
than of copper knives, and by far more axes and hammers of stone than of
copper, by no means proves that at the time of the Trojan war there were
more stone than copper instruments. Stone lances are, moreover, very
rarely met with; this year I found only two of which I know positively
that they are lances; the one was discovered at a depth of 11½ feet,
the other at 20 feet deep.

Mr. Frank Calvert of the Dardanelles, who wishes to convince me by the
hippopotamus which I found at a depth of 23 feet, that the _débris_ at
this depth belongs to a period when hippopotami inhabited the rivers of
the Troad, has expressed the opinion, in his article in the _Levant
Herald_ of the 25th of January, 1873, that Homer would necessarily have
mentioned stone knives and instruments if they had existed in Troy, and
that, as he speaks of none, there could have been none; consequently,
that none of the ruined strata which I have cut through, containing
stone implements, can belong to the Homeric Troy, and that the stratum
directly following the Greek ruins, which extend as far down as 6½
feet, must be more than 1000 years older than the Trojan war.

If Mr. Calvert had taken the trouble to look into Homer, he would have
found that the word ‘hammer’ (ῥαιστήρ) occurs only once (_Iliad_, XVIII.
477), and that is in the hand of Hephæstus. It is, indeed, not said of
what material the hammer was made; the fire-god, however, would probably
have had none other than a copper hammer. Mr. Calvert also does not
appear to have ever seen a silex knife, for otherwise he would know that
they are almost always only from 1½ to 2½, and rarely 3, inches
long; and moreover, with but few exceptions, they are made in the form
of saws. I have here only once met with a saw of this kind 5 inches in
length.

In Homer there is _not one_ opportunity where such small saw-knives
could have been mentioned, nor is it as yet altogether clear to me what
they can have been used for.[240] Homer’s heroes carry their copper
knives beside their swords, and generally use them for killing the
sacrificial animal, for which purpose, of course, flint knives from
1½ to 3 inches long would not have been appropriate; but those long
copper knives, the size of which is accurately indicated by the stone
moulds in which they were cast, would have been very suitable. In the
Iliad (XVIII. 597), we see Hephæstus making youths with golden cutlasses
upon the shield of Achilles.

Mr. Calvert believes that the fact of Homer’s not mentioning either the
small flint saws or stone knives is a proof against the identity of
Hissarlik with the site of Troy. I, however, should find it surprising,
and so assuredly would all scholars and admirers of Homer, if the
Homeric heroes had appeared armed with silex saws from 1½ to 3 inches
in length; for a hero, especially in an epic poem, can only carry and
achieve something heroic. If the Homeric hero requires a stone weapon,
he does not feel in his pocket for a silex saw from 1½ to 3 inches
long, but he takes the first huge stone he meets with, such as two of
the strongest men from among the people could not have raised from the
earth on to a cart by means of levers; but the hero carries it in his
hand with the same ease with which a shepherd would carry the fleece of
a ram, and flings the rock with infinite force against the gate of the
enemy, splinters the panels to shivers, and shatters the double hinges
and the bars; the gate flies open, and the stone-falls with a mighty
crash into the hostile camp.[241] Upon another occasion, another hero
uses a stone weapon. He, too, does not look for a small silex saw, but
takes an immense block of stone, which two men from among the people
would have been unable to lift, and hurls it against his opponent.[242]
Mr. Calvert’s excavations in the Pergamus were confined to two small
cuttings which still exist, and he is wrong in saying that I have
continued his excavations. As my plans of the Pergamus prove, my
excavations of 1870, 1871, and up to the middle of June, 1872, were made
exclusively on the Turkish portion of the Pergamus; and it was only in
June that I began to excavate the site of the temple of Apollo upon Mr.
Calvert’s land, because a depression in the ground, 111½ feet long
and 75½ feet broad, had betrayed the site to me. My friend’s two
small cuttings by no means gave any idea of the existence of such a
temple.

I have never, as Mr. Calvert says, found the native rock at a depth of
67 feet. I found it at a depth of 16 meters (or 52¾ feet) upon my
large platform, and at a depth of 14 meters (or 46-1/5 feet) in my great
cutting, in the Roman well, and upon the south side of the Tower. In Mr.
Calvert’s field, however, I found the primary soil only in the hill
covered by the very ancient buttress, which has been repeatedly
described.

Examining Mr. Calvert’s article further, I assure my readers that, with
the exception of the wall which I have already described as consisting
of Corinthian pillars taken from the temple of Athena, I have never come
upon any Byzantine ruins here;[243] that all the Byzantine coins I found
were but a few inches below the surface; and that the ruins and the
_débris_ of the Greek colony, as anyone may convince himself from the
earthen walls of my excavations, rarely extend below 2 meters (6½
feet). Mr. Calvert’s statement, that I also find stone implements,
perforated cylinders, grinding-mills, and masses of shells, immediately
below these ruins, is incorrect; for in not one of my excavations have I
hitherto found these things at less than 4 meters (13 feet) deep, and if
I now find them immediately below the foundations of the Temple of
Athena, I explain this by assuming that the _débris_ which was dug out
of the great excavation for the reservoir of the temple was used for
increasing the elevation of the site of the sanctuary. Mr. Calvert is
also wrong in his statement that the larger bones were all broken to get
at the marrow; on the contrary, we very rarely meet with broken bones.
He is again incorrect in stating that I find small articles of bronze,
as well as ornaments in gold and silver filigree work. I have never as
yet found bronze here, but in all cases copper; and never have I found
ornaments of gold or silver filigree work. The ornaments represented in
the drawings are of pure gold, or electrum, or silver, or copper. His
statement is also erroneous, that I occasionally find engraved
representations of fish-bones upon vessels. It is true that I often find
vessels round which rows of cuneiform decorations are engraved; but
these are never connected with one another, and therefore have no
resemblance at all to fish-bones. Further, Mr. Calvert is mistaken in
his assertion that in the depths of this hill there are house-walls
composed of unhewn stones laid roughly one on the top of the other. The
architect is not yet born, who could construct house-walls of such
stones without some kind of cement. The walls of clay do not, as Mr.
Calvert’s statement would lead one to believe, consist of _one_ mass of
clay, but of sun-dried bricks; and I assure my readers that I have never
yet, as Mr. Calvert erroneously maintains, found the impressions of long
rushes, which indicate the use of thatch-work. My learned friend is also
completely wrong in his statement that the floors of some of the houses
have been glazed, and that the regularity of the levellings and the
flatness of these floors prove that the glaze is not the result of
accident; further, that one of these glazed floors has a length of 20
feet. I would give a great deal if this were true, for such a Trojan
marvel would attract thousands desirous of information. Unfortunately,
however, such glazed floors exist only in Mr. Calvert’s own imagination.
My friend is as completely mistaken in his reports about the Great
Tower, which he describes as consisting of two walls, which meet at a
sharp angle and diverge to a distance of 40 feet, the space between them
being as yet unexplored. It is only the southern wall of this building
that rises at an angle of 75 degrees: on the north side, as it was
sufficiently supported by the mound 65½ feet broad which rested
against it, it had above it only a small perpendicular wall, 3¼ feet
high and broad; whereas the southern wall, which inclines at an angle of
15 degrees, is 6½ feet thick. The whole of the inner space between
the two walls consists of stones laid loosely upon one another. The
perpendicular height of the Tower above the primary rock is not 15 feet,
as Mr. Calvert says, but exactly 20 feet. The terra-cotta discs with two
small holes, which, according to Mr. Calvert, I find here at all depths,
I have in reality always found only close to the surface, as far down as
3¼ feet, and rarely as far down as 6½ feet. I further assure my
readers that I know nothing about the large perforated cylinders, which
Mr. Calvert says I find in great quantities, and frequently with half
their diameter entirely in the clay of the walls. The largest of the
terra-cotta cylinders which I have discovered here are only 4 inches
long, and never have I seen one of these cylinders in a house-wall.

In conclusion, I must positively deny Mr. Calvert’s assertion that stone
implements, although met with in the same stratum with articles made of
different metals and with splendid earthenware, argue a primeval and
pre-historic age. Small knives and saws of silex are, for instance,
found in numbers in the Acropolis of Athens, and they appear to have
been used up to a very late period. A rude pre-historic people could by
no means have made the beautiful terra-cottas which are found here
immediately below the ruins of the Greek colony, and still less could
they have manufactured the splendid pottery which shows such a high
degree of artistic taste, and which I meet with here at a great depth.

The life in this wilderness is not without danger, and last night, for
instance, my wife and I and the foreman Photidas had the narrowest
escape of being burnt alive. In the bedroom on the north side of the
wooden house which we are inhabiting, we had had a small fireplace made,
and, owing to the terrible cold which has again set in during the last
six days, we have lighted a fire in it daily. But the stones of the
fireplace rest merely upon the boards of the floor, and, whether it was
owing to a crevice in the cement joining the stones, or by some other
means, the floor took fire, and when I accidentally awoke this morning
at 3 o’clock, it was burning over a space of two yards long by a yard
broad. The room was filled with dense smoke, and the north wall was just
beginning to catch fire; a few seconds would have sufficed to burn a
hole into it, and the whole house would then have been in flames in less
than a minute, for a fearful north wind was blowing from that side. In
my fright I did not lose my presence of mind. I poured the contents of a
bath upon the burning north wall, and thus in a moment stopped the fire
in that direction. Our cries awoke Photidas, who was asleep in the
adjoining room, and he called the other foremen from the stone house to
our assistance. In the greatest haste they fetched hammers, iron levers
and pickaxes; the floor was broken up, torn to pieces, and quantities of
damp earth thrown upon it, for we had no water. But, as the lower beams
were burning in many places, a quarter of an hour elapsed before we got
the fire under and all danger was at an end.




CHAPTER XX.

     Discovery of a large house upon the Tower--Marks of a great
     conflagration--Primitive Altar: its very remarkable position--Ruins
     of the Temple of Athena--A small cellar--Skeletons of warriors with
     copper helmets and a lance--Structure of the
     helmet-crests--Terra-cottas--A crucible with copper still in
     it--Other objects--Extreme fineness of the engravings on the
     whorls--Pottery--Stone implements--Copper pins and other objects.


Pergamus of Troy, April 5th, 1873.

Amidst cold but glorious spring weather most favourable for the workmen,
who now number 150 on the average, I have this week continued the
excavations with the greatest energy and with good results.

The most interesting object that I have discovered here in these three
years is certainly a house which I brought to light this week, and of
which eight rooms have already been laid open; it stands upon the Great
Tower, at a depth of 7 and 8 meters (23 to 26 feet), directly below the
Greek Temple of Athena. Its walls consist of small stones cemented with
earth, and they appear to belong to different epochs; for, while some of
them rest directly upon the stones of the Tower, others were not built
till the Tower was covered with 8 inches, and in several cases even with
3¼ feet, of _débris_. These walls also show differences in thickness;
one of them is 4¼ feet, others are only 25½ inches, and others
again not more than 19-2/3 inches thick. Several of these walls are 10
feet high, and on some of them may be seen large remnants of the
coatings of clay, painted yellow or white. Only in one large room, the
dimensions of which, however, cannot be exactly ascertained, have I as
yet found an actual floor of unhewn slabs of limestone, the smooth sides
of which are turned outside. Black marks, the result of fire, upon the
lower portion of the walls of the other rooms which have as yet been
excavated, leave no doubt that their floors were of wood, and were
destroyed by fire. In one room there is a wall in the form of a
semicircle, which has been burnt as black as coal. All the rooms as yet
laid open, and not resting directly upon the Tower, have been excavated
down to the same level; and I find, without exception, that the _débris_
below them consists of red or yellow ashes and burnt ruins. Above these,
even in the rooms themselves, I found nothing but either red or yellow
wood-ashes, mixed with bricks that had been dried in the sun and
subsequently burnt by the conflagration, or black _débris_, the remains
of furniture, mixed with masses of small shells: in proof of this there
are the many remains which are still hanging on the walls. In several
rooms I found red jars (πίθοι) from 7 to 8 feet high, some of which I
leave _in situ_. Above the house, and as far as the foundations of the
temple, I found nothing but red and yellow wood-ashes. (See Plate X.,
opposite p. 287.)

To the east side of the house is a sacrificial Altar of a very primitive
description, which is turned to the north-west by west, and consists of
a slab of slate granite about 5¼ feet long, and 5½ feet broad. The
upper part of the stone is cut into the form of a crescent, probably for
killing upon it the animal which was intended for sacrifice. About 4
feet below the sacrificial altar I found a channel made of slabs of
green slate, which probably served to carry off the blood. Strangely
enough this Altar does not stand on the Tower itself, but 3¼ feet
above it, upon bricks or lumps of earth which had been dried in the sun,
and which have been actually burnt by the conflagration, but
nevertheless have no stability. The altar was surrounded by an enormous
quantity of the remains of bricks of this description, as well as by
red and yellow wood-ashes, to a height of 10 feet. Of course I leave the
altar _in situ_, so that visitors to the Troad may convince themselves
by the nature of its pedestal and of the _débris_ of the earthen wall,
beside which it stands, of the correctness of all these statements,
which might otherwise appear too incredible. The remarkable
sub-structure of this sacrificial altar, the curious _débris_ in which
it was buried, the preservation of the great house, which has evidently
been burnt, and the walls of which were built at different epochs, and
lastly, the fact that its spaces were filled with heterogeneous _débris_
and with colossal jars--all this is a puzzle to me. I confine myself,
therefore, to stating the facts merely, and refrain from expressing any
kind of conjecture.

[Illustration: No. 188. Great Altar for Sacrifices, found in the depths
of the Temple of Athena (1/23 of the real size).]

Above the house, in the south-western wall of this excavation, are the
ruins of the southern wall of the Temple of Athena. They are 5¼ feet
high, and consist of large white blocks of limestone. Their great
breadth gives them an imposing appearance, and this is further increased
by the great reservoir of the temple, the walls of which are directly to
the east of the altar, and 4¼ feet high. Above the very ancient
house, and below the southern wall of the temple, may be seen the ruins
of a small round cellar, 3½ feet in diameter and about 2½ feet
high, which stands below the foundations, and must, therefore, be older
than the temple. It is built of chalk and stones, but the inner side has
been painted over with a kind of varnish or glaze, and has a glossy
appearance. This small cellar was filled with fragments of Greek
terra-cottas, among which, however, I found six small vases, almost
uninjured.

This very ancient house, with its small rooms, as it stands, is very
like a Pompeian house; it cannot, indeed, be at all compared with the
houses of Pompeii in regard to architecture or decoration, but it
surpasses them in peculiarity.

[Illustration: No. 189. Copper Lance of a Trojan Warrior, found beside
his Skeleton (7 M.).]

By the side of the house, as well as in its larger apartments, I have
found great quantities of human bones, but as yet only _two entire
skeletons_, which must be those of _warriors_, for they were found at a
depth of 7 meters (23 feet), with _copper helmets upon their heads_.
Beside one of the skeletons I found a _large lance_, a drawing of which
I give. The one skull is uninjured, and I add a faithful drawing of it;
the other is somewhat broken, but I hope soon to have the pieces joined
with cement. Both of the skulls are large, but remarkably narrow.
Unfortunately both helmets were broken; however, I hope to be able to
put one of the two together when I return to Athens.

[Illustration: No. 190. Skull of a Trojan Warrior, belonging to one of
the two Skeletons found in the House on the Tower (7 M.). It is long,
but narrow.]

[Illustration: No. 191. (_a_) The upper and (_b_) lower pieces of a
Trojan Helmet-crest (φάλος) placed together. (_c_.) A small piece of the
Helmet remains adhering to the lower part of the Crest (7 M.). A pin,
fastened to the front of the part (_b_), goes into the hollow base of
(_a_), and supports it. (See the figures on p. 334.)]

The upper portions of both helmets have, however, been well preserved;
and these parts form the “φάλος,” or ridge, in which the “λόφος
ἵππουρις,” or horse-hair plume, so frequently mentioned in the Iliad,
was fixed.”[244] In both cases the φάλος consists of two pieces. The
large copper ring found beside the helmet had been attached to it, in
what manner I do not know. Two days later, when I found the second
helmet, I perceived from the manner in which the lower portion was fixed
to the helmet that the pieces must be put together as shown in the
drawing. Through the lower portion of each helmet runs a copper nail,
which has a round head and its other end simply bent round. As to the
place into which the λόφος ἵππουρις was inserted and fixed there can be
no doubt, for the opening at the top of the ridge can have served no
other purpose. By the side of the second helmet also, I found the
fragment of a copper ring similar to that found beside the first
helmet.[245]

[Illustration: No. 192. Great Copper Ring, found near the Helmet-crest
(7 M.).]

[Illustration: No. 193. An elegant bright-red Vase of Terra-cotta,
decorated with branches and signs of lightning, with holes in the
handles and lips, for cords to hang it up by. Found on the Tower (8
M.).]

[Illustration: No. 194. Terra-cotta Vase. Found on the Tower (8 M.).]

In some of the rooms I found no terra-cottas at all, but in others
enormous quantities of splendid black, red, and brown vases, pots, and
jars of all sizes, and of most fanciful shapes; but unfortunately in
hewing down the hard _débris_ most of them were broken, and I shall not
be able to have them repaired till I return to Athens. I wish to draw
attention to the elegance of the red jars with necks bent back, two
ears, and three breasts; as well as to the black or red vases ornamented
with engraved branches of trees, with three feet and two small and two
large upraised handles as arms; also to the terra-cotta goblets, which
are occasionally the form of champagne-glasses, sometimes also in the
shape of a soup-tureen with two handles.

The most interesting of the terra-cottas found this week, and the most
important to archæology, are these:--the beautiful red vase-cover with
the owl’s face and helmet of the Ilian Athena, which was found in a
large red urn at a depth of 8 meters (27 feet):--then two vases,
likewise adorned with the owl’s head of the tutelary goddess of Troy,
but also with two breasts, a large navel, and two upraised arms. One of
these vases was found upon the Tower, the other above it, at a depth of
4 meters (13 feet).

[Illustration: No. 195. Profile of a Vase-cover, with the Owl’s Face and
Helmet of Athena, in brilliant red Terra-cotta. Found in an urn on the
Tower (8 M.).]

[Illustration: No. 196. An Earthenware Crucible on four feet, _still
containing some copper_. Found on the Tower (7 M.).]

Among the other very remarkable terra-cottas found in one of the rooms
of the subterranean house, at a depth of 7 meters (23 feet), there is a
crucible with four feet, in which some copper is still to be seen; also
a small brilliant black funnel. I also found in the house, at the depth
of 7 and 8 meters (23 to 26 feet), several idols of ordinary stone or of
marble; one also of bone, upon which are seen the two arms of the
goddess; it is only upon one of the marble idols, and upon one of those
of stone, that I find the two eyes. This week we met with only one idol
of ordinary stone with a rude engraving of the owl’s face; it was
discovered at a depth of 4 meters (13 feet). I must remark that the
idols of common stone are always very roughly made.

Of the small terra-cotta whorls, both with and without symbolical
engravings, we this week again met with 251 pieces; of these, however,
only 31 had symbolical figures which I have not yet found. Several of
the engraved decorations on these articles have been executed with a
fineness which is truly astonishing, and more especially those which are
engraved upon brilliantly black wheel-shaped pieces: they are so fine
that I could only distinguish them through a magnifying glass.

[Illustration: No. 197. Flower Saucer; the flat bottom ornamented. Found
on the Tower (8 M.).]

At a depth of 6 and 8 meters (20 to 26 feet) we again met with very many
ordinary plates, which had been turned on a potter’s wheel. At the same
depth, and in the above-mentioned house, we found a curious vessel,
exactly in the shape of a saucer to a flower-pot, ornamented with four
triangles and two large crosses, one of which is formed by large dots,
the other by lines. Several curious moulds were also found this week,
one of which is of coarse terra-cotta for casting eight copper bars; the
other moulds are made of mica-schist, and one was for casting an object
in the form of a leaf with three long thorns on either side; the other
mould shows three uniform furrows for casting oblong rings. This week we
found only fragments of stone moulds for casting weapons and
instruments. At a depth of from 10 to 26 feet we also discovered 27
small silex knives like saws, and six very pretty knife-blades made of
black obsidian, which are sharp enough to serve as razors. We have found
no copper knives this week, but, on the other hand, four copper dress or
hair pins, from 2-1/3 to above 5 inches long; also thirteen needles for
knitting or embroidering; likewise sixteen large bodkins made of
staghorn, and a number of pointed boars’ tusks. Among the stone
implements found during the week, there are two very pretty hammers of
diorite and a very neat perforated prop of mica-schist with a small
furrow at the top, for turning a spit, and other such things. (See No.
177, p. 261.)

[Illustration: No. 198. A piece of Terra-cotta, with two holes slightly
sunk in front like eyes, and a hole perforated from side to side (8
M.).]

[Illustration: No. 199. A remarkable Terra-cotta Vessel on three long
feet, with a handle and two small ears (7 M.).]

In returning to the terra-cottas I must mention a square article, the
upper part of which gradually becomes narrower and thinner: on the front
side there are two small depressions in the form of eyes, and on one
side it is perforated. I add a drawing of this curious article, the use
of which is quite unknown to me. I may mention further a curious pot
found in the house, at a depth of 7 meters (23 feet), with three feet,
two small ears, and one handle; also those neat cups with one handle and
three feet, which are repeatedly met with in the same house. At a depth
of 3 meters (10 feet) we discovered a bright red polished little box,
from the under side of which two small perforated rings project. The
pattern on the bottom represents the sun with its rays; in the centre of
the sun’s disc is a cross, which ends in four small circles, and these
are probably intended to represent the heads of the nails which fastened
the two crossed staves employed to produce the holy fire. In every one
of the four spaces formed by the cross there is a 卐, one of which is
represented by dots.

[Illustration: No. 200. A beautiful bright-red Terra-cotta Box (or
Vase-cover?), decorated with a [+] four 卐, and a halo of solar rays (3
M.).]

We also again met with one of those small perforated terra-cottas,
consisting of two connected balls, and which somewhat resemble our
shirt-studs; the upper part of the article in question shows three
simple rising suns and six stars; the lower part represents three triple
rising suns, and three stars in the circle round the central point.

During the week we have met with only one terra-cotta ball; it shows an
encircling jagged streak and five small streaks, which may denote suns
or moons.

[Illustration: Nos. 201, 202. Little Decorated Whorls, of a remarkable
shape (6 M.).]7

[Illustration:

Dr. Schliemann’s Houses and Magazine.

Plain of Troy and Hellespont.

PLATE X.

Upper
House.

Palace
of
Priam.

Scæan
Gate.

Tower of Ilium.

_Page 287._

THE TOWER OF ILIUM, SCÆAN GATE, AND PALACE OF PRIAM.

Looking North along the cutting through the whole Hill.]




CHAPTER XXI.

     Discovery of a street in the Pergamus--Three curious stone walls of
     different periods--Successive fortifications of the hill--Remains
     of ancient houses under the Temple of Athena, that have suffered a
     great conflagration--Older house-walls below these, and a wall of
     fortification--Store, with the nine colossal jars--The great
     Altar--Objects found east of the Tower--Pottery with Egyptian
     hieroglyphics--Greek and other terra-cottas, &c.--Remarkable owl
     vase--Handle, with an ox-head--Various very curious objects--A
     statue of one Metrodorus by Pytheas of Argos, with an
     inscription--Another Greek inscription, in honour of C. Claudius
     Nero.


Pergamus of Troy, April 16th, 1873.

Since my report of the 5th of this month I have had, on an average, 160
workmen, and have brought many wonderful things to light, among which I
may especially mention a street of the Pergamus, which was discovered
close to my house, at a depth of 30 feet, in the Great Tower. It is
17¼ feet broad, and is paved with stone flags, from 4¼ to 5 feet
long, and from 35 inches to 4½ feet broad. It runs down very abruptly
in a due south-western direction towards the Plain. I have as yet only
been able to lay bare a length of 10 meters (33-1/3 feet). It leads,
without doubt, to the Scæan Gate, the position of which appears to be
accurately indicated, on the west side at the foot of the hill, by the
direction of the wall and by the formation of the ground; it cannot be
more than 492 feet distant from the Tower. To the right and left of the
street there is an enclosure 28½ inches broad and 11 feet long. The
slope of the street is so great that, while on the north-east side, as
far as it is there uncovered, it is only 30 feet below the surface of
the hill, yet at a distance of 33 feet it already lies as low as 37
feet.[246]

This beautifully paved street leads me to conjecture that a grand
building must at one time have stood at the top of it, at a short
distance on the north-east side; and therefore, seven days ago, when the
street was discovered, I immediately set 100 men to dig down the
north-eastern ground lying in front of it; this cutting I have made
78½ feet long, 78½ feet broad, and 33 feet deep. The removal of
these 7600 cubic yards of huge masses of hard _débris_ and stones is
rendered much easier by the fact that it joins my last year’s great
cutting, which runs quite horizontally from the northern declivity as
far as the Tower, and is therefore very well adapted for the use of
man-carts. In order to extract from this excavation all the objects of
the greatest use to archæology, I am having the walls made
perpendicular, as in fact I have had them made in almost all of the
other cuttings. As the work of removing this gigantic block of earth is
carried on both from above and from below, I confidently hope to have
finished it in twenty days’ work.

In this great bank of earth there are three curious walls, built one
above another, of small stones joined with earth. They have been built
at very different periods, and even the uppermost and latest of the
three, as is clear from the material, must be considerably older than
the foundation of the Greek colony about the year 700 B.C. This
uppermost wall is about 5 feet thick, built up from a depth of 11½
feet to within 1¾ foot of the surface, a circumstance which I do not
at all understand; for, as the ruins of the Greek colony reach down to
the depth of 6½ feet, the wall must, for many centuries, have stood
high above the earth. Still the Greeks may have used it as a foundation
for a building, and it may thus have been preserved. Below this wall
there is a stratum of earth 11½ inches thick; and then comes the
second wall, projecting about 11½ inches, and 6½ feet high; and
this again rests upon another and much older wall. The last runs in an
oblique line in a south-western direction parallel with the Tower-road,
and furnishes a second proof that the surface of the hill, which is now
quite horizontal here, did not slope down very abruptly towards the
Plain at this part.

Thus the opinion which I have previously expressed, that only the first
inhabitants of this hill had walls and fortifications, is now proved to
be erroneous. For these three walls, which at one time stood at the edge
of the declivity, and the three which I cut through at the south-east
side of the hill, can only have been walls of fortification, and they
evidently belong to the various tribes who inhabited this locality after
the destruction of the first nation up to the foundation of the Greek
colony.

As my further excavations have shown, at a depth of 8 meters (26 feet),
immediately below the Temple of Athena, and at a distance of 131 feet
from the above-mentioned street, a large wall runs out from the Tower in
a southern direction. I have had 6½ feet of this wall laid bare to
the south. But how far it extends in this direction cannot be
ascertained without making new and enormous excavations. It is also
impossible for me to ascertain its breadth without breaking down the
curious pre-Hellenic house. It also appears to me that the Tower ends
here, for in my investigations at the foot of that ancient house I no
longer found any trace of it. Instead of it I came upon very ancient
houses, the walls of which, still partially covered with a coating of
clay and white colour, all bearing traces of a terrible conflagration,
which has so completely destroyed everything that was in the rooms, that
we only occasionally find charred fragments of pottery among the red
wood-ashes with which the spaces are filled. Curiously enough we again
find, below these very ancient houses, other house-walls which must
certainly be older; and these too show indications of having been
exposed to a terrible heat. In fact, the labyrinth of very ancient
house-walls, built one above another, and found in the depths of the
Temple of Athena erected by Lysimachus, is unique, and presents the
archæologist with the richest materials for his investigations. But what
is most inexplicable to me about this labyrinth of walls is a wall of
fortification, 11¾ feet high, running through it from W.N.W. to
E.S.E. This is likewise built of stone joined with earth, and is 6 feet
broad at the top and 12 feet broad at the foot: it does not stand
directly upon the primary rock, and was not built till the rock had
gradually become covered with a layer of earth 1¾ foot in thickness.
It appears therefore to be somewhat less ancient than the Great Tower,
which stands directly upon the primary rock. Running parallel with this
wall of fortification, only 2½ feet from it and at the same depth,
there is a wall 2 feet high, which is likewise built of stones joined
with earth.

The room at the greatest depth which I have excavated is 10 feet high
and 11¼ feet broad; but it may have been higher; its length I have
not yet ascertained. One of the compartments of the uppermost houses,
below the Temple of Athena and belonging to the pre-Hellenic period,
appears to have been used as a wine-merchant’s cellar or as a magazine,
for in it there are nine enormous earthen jars (πίθοι) of various forms,
about 5¾ feet high and 4¾ feet across, their mouths being from
29½ to 35¼ inches broad.[247] Each of these earthen jars has four
handles, 3¾ inches broad, and the clay of which they are made has the
enormous thickness of 2¼ inches. Upon the south side of these jars I
found a wall 26 feet in extent and 10 feet high, built of sun-dried
bricks, which, however, had become really burnt bricks through the
conflagration. This wall, which likewise appears to me to be a
fortification and very thick, I have had broken down to the
perpendicular line of the foundations of the Temple of Athena.

[Illustration: PLATE XI.

Reservoir. Altar.

A.--THE EXCAVATIONS IN THE TEMPLE OF ATHENA.

From the East.

B.--THE MAGAZINE, WITH ITS COLOSSAL JARS, _Page 290._

In the depths of the Temple of Athena.]

I am in great fear lest the Turks should make off with the large stone
altar, the upper part of which forms a crescent, to use it for building
a minaret in the village of Chiplak; therefore, without moving it from
its place, I shall have it carefully split in two, so that it will be
useless for building purposes. This stone and its pedestal are daubed
over with a white crust of clay, which upon the pedestal is nearly an
inch thick.

I have continued the excavation on the south-east side of the Pergamus,
and I have found that the great wall, which I regarded as a continuation
of the Tower, is part of a very ancient and large wall of enclosure.

[Illustration: No. 203. Fragment of a Terra-cotta Vase, with Egyptian
hieroglyphics, from the bottom of the Greek Stratum (2 M.).]

[Illustration: No. 204. A Greek Lamp on a tall foot (2 M.).]

[Illustration: No. 205. Fragment of a two-horned Serpent (κεράστης), in
Terra-cotta (3 M.).]

Since my last report we have not found any kind of interesting
antiquities worth mentioning on the whole of the east side of the Tower;
but in the large new excavation to the north-east of the Tower-road we
have discovered a great quantity of exceedingly curious articles. The
ruins of the Greek colony here extend exactly to a depth of 6½ feet,
and there I found a fragment of pottery with painted Egyptian
hieroglyphics, of which I give a drawing. Three other pieces of pottery
were found at a depth of 10 feet. One of these represents an owl’s face,
a 卐 and the impressions of the four nails for fixing it; the second
fragment has a 卐 in which each of the four ends again terminates in a
square; the third fragment represents a wheel in a state of rotation. At
a depth of 6½ feet we also came upon a terra-cotta idol with the
owl’s face and the upraised arms, which are broken off, but appear to
have been longer. This idol, like all the others, has a human figure:
the owl’s beak and eyes project from the head and have been carefully
wrought; there are indications of hair on the forehead, and two lines on
the neck seem to denote armour. At the same depth I found the bottom of
a dish, upon which there is a representation in high relief of two
youths embracing and kissing each other; this is a most masterly piece
of work. At a depth of 5 feet we found the upper portion of a vase with
a pretty owl’s head; the rim of the mouth forms a kind of helmet. A
little deeper than a foot we met with a good-looking head of a man in
terra-cotta; at 2 meters (6½ feet) down, a Greek lamp with a foot
2¾ inches long, and at the same depth some very pretty vases and
jugs, and a terra-cotta flattened on one side, with two perforated holes
and a stamp, in which there is a very pretty picture of the head and
shoulders of a woman. At a depth of 3 and 4 meters (10 and 13 feet) were
twelve marble idols without owls’ faces; upon one of these idols there
are four horizontal lines on the neck; further, at a depth of 10 feet, a
fragment of a serpent with two horns; at a depth of 16½ feet, a piece
of diorite in the form of a bell, beautifully polished, and twice
perforated; at the same depth, a quantity of beautiful terra-cotta
vases and jugs, prettily ornamented, ivory needles for knitting or
embroidering, and a very neat perforated terra-cotta cylinder 1¼ inch
long, covered with engraved symbolical signs. But the most curious
article, found at a depth of 5 meters (16½ feet), is an idol of the
Ilian Athena with an owl’s head, which is rounded off in front and at
the back; the eyes are very large and beautiful, but the beak is small
and roughly made; on the neck there is a cross line, and above it ten
upright lines, which are probably intended to denote armour; the whole
of the rest of the body is covered with lines, in which, more especially
on the back, the bird’s feathers are unmistakable; and there is a
peculiar ornament on the abdomen. This idol, like all the others, has a
human figure.[248]

[Illustration: No. 206. Terra-cotta Cylinder, 1¼ in. long, with
Symbolical Signs (5 M.).]

[Illustration: No. 207. Terra-cotta Vase with helmeted image of the
Ilian Athena (6 M.).]

[Illustration: No. 208. Fragment of a large Cup-handle in black
Terra-cotta; head that of an Ox (6 _M._).]

[Illustration: No. 209. A finely decorated little Vase of Terra-cotta (6
M.).]

At a depth of 6 meters (20 feet) I found two splendid brilliant red
vases with representations of the Ilian Athena with the owl’s head, a
kind of helmet, two upraised arms, two breasts, and the large circular’
prominent elevation on the abdomen.[249] At the same depth I found an
idol of the usual form, made of bone; and upon a handle of black
terra-cotta, which has probably belonged to a large cup, the head of an
ox, executed in high relief with great skill;[250] this involuntarily
reminds one of Homer’s Βοῶπις πότνια Ἥρη ("Our Lady Hera, with the head
[or eyes] of a cow”). Among many other remarkable terra-cotta vessels,
at this depth, I also found a small but really splendidly ornamented
vase, the surface of which is divided into fourteen alternate
compartments, larger and smaller.[251] In each of the larger
compartments there are three circles of little stars and a star in the
centre; in each of the smaller compartments there are triple zigzag
lines; this vase has little holes in the small handles for hanging it up
by a string. Among the other curious articles from this depth there is a
silex saw, 4 inches long and 1¾ inch broad, also one of those round,
twice perforated terra-cottas flattened on one side and with a large
stamp which represents a swan and an antelope. A similar terra-cotta,
the stamp upon which represents the head of a warrior with a helmet, was
found at a depth of 8 meters (26 feet). These two are the first
terra-cottas of this kind which I have hitherto discovered below a
depth of 2 meters (6½ feet).

[Illustration: No. 210. Terra-cotta Disc stamped with a Swan and an
Antelope (6 M.). Remarkable for the depth.]

[Illustration: No. 211. Terra-cotta Disc pierced with two holes, and
stamped with the Head of a Warrior. Remarkable for the depth (8 M.).]

At a depth of 7 meters (23 feet) I found a small tripod with a
projecting owl’s face, also a pretty red terra-cotta cup (cover) with
the owl’s face of the Ilian Athena and her helmet; a knife and a long
copper instrument; a piece of bone 3¼ inches long, ornamented with
very artistically engraved symbolical signs, and among other exceedingly
curious terra-cottas, the handle of a cup with a cross and the marks of
the four nails for fixing it; further, a fragment of the upper portion
of a large urn, which is ornamented with three encircling stripes: the
upper and lower stripes consist of peculiarly interwoven crooked lines;
the middle one contains small circles, in each of which is a cross.

[Illustration: No. 212 A piece of bone, curiously engraved (7 M.).]

At a depth of 8 meters (26 feet) we discovered a marble idol with the
owl’s head of the tutelary goddess of Ilium, and a brilliant red
terra-cotta idol of the same goddess, which, curiously enough, has on
its head a small, but very pretty vase with two handles; the owl’s face
of this last-mentioned idol has enormous eyes, and is very expressive.
Of terra-cotta vases and dishes we found an especially large number in
these depths. I can, however, only give drawings of a few of them, for
most were brought out in a broken condition, and I cannot have them
repaired till I return to Athens. Of those terra-cottas which were got
out unharmed, a small vase with two holes in the mouth, for being hung
up by a cord, is especially deserving of attention; it is surrounded by
figures in the shape of hearts with crosses; then saucer-shaped pots
with large handles; other little pots in the form of salt-cellars, and
several vases round at the bottom with three feet or without feet;
terra-cotta scoops in the form of cups with large handles; then a large
terra-cotta lid with a handle; it is of a very curious shape, and weighs
730 grammes. We also found several implements of copper.

[Illustration: No. 213. Fragment of a Trojan Idol of bright-red
Terra-cotta (6 M.).]

[Illustration: Nos. 214, 215. Terra-cotta Cups or Scoops (7 M.)]

[Illustration: No. 216. Vase Cover in Terra-cotta (8 M.).]

At a depth of 9 meters (29½ feet) we found a copper lance and a dozen
very large vases, brown and black. At the same depth I found a pretty
brilliant brown cup in the form of a flower-pot, with two large handles.
At a depth of 26 and 29½ feet I have found, since the 5th of the
month, eleven beautiful sling-bullets of loadstone and two of porphyry.
We met with very few stone implements, only two beautiful axes of
diorite, at the depths of 29½ and 33 feet. At the latter depth I
again found one of the brush-handles of terra-cotta, which are often
found, and some vases with three feet and rings at the sides for hanging
them up.

[Illustration: No. 217. Terra-cotta Handle of a Trojan Brush, with the
holes in which the bristles have been fixed. (10 M.).]

During the last eleven days I have collected 991 of the terra-cotta
whorls, 581 of which have symbolical signs, but only 79 have engravings
which are new to me. Long thin copper nails with rounded heads, which
must have been used as dress or hair pins, were met with at all depths.
During these eleven days I have found 20 exquisitely polished axes of
diorite.

At a depth of 1 meter (3¼ feet), we yesterday found in the Temple of
Athena, beside an inscribed pedestal of black slate, 3 feet 8 inches
high and 20¾ inches broad, the statue of a man, of fine white marble,
nearly 4 feet high. As is proved by the inscription, it was made by
Pytheas of Argos, and was erected by the Ilians in honour of Metrodorus,
the son of Themistagoras, of whom it is a representation. The figure was
in the position of an orator, as is proved by the footmarks on the
pedestal. The head and the feet are unfortunately wanting.

The inscriptions run as follows:--

          ΟΔΗΜΟΣΟΙΛΙΕΙΩΝ
    ΜΗΤΡΟΔΩΡΟΝΘΕΜΙΣΤΑΓΟΡΟΥ

And lower down, on the same side of the pedestal--

    ΠΥΘΕΑΣΑΡΓΕΙΟΣΕΠΟΙΗΣΕ

    Ὁ δῆμος ὁ Ἰλιείων
    Μητρόδωρον Θεμισταγόρου
    Πυθέας Ἀργεῖος ἐποίησε.

There were in antiquity many men named Metrodorus, but only two of them
were especially celebrated, and both were natives of Asia Minor. The
one, born in Lampsacus, was a pupil of Epicurus;[252] the other, a
native of Scepsis, was a philosopher, orator, and statesman, and was
held in high esteem by Mithridates VII., Eupator,[253] who afterwards
had him put to death in a horrible manner.[254] The name of the father
of this Metrodorus of Scepsis is unknown, and whether he was called
Themistagoras, or otherwise, is uncertain; but it is extremely probable
that the inscription and the statue were raised in honour of the
Scepsian orator, philosopher, and statesman. I find no mention whatever
of the sculptor Pytheas of Argos. Only one Pytheas, a silver-chaser, is
named by Pliny,[255] as being a contemporary of Pompey the Great: Pliny,
however, does not state his birthplace. Another Pytheas was a wall
painter and a native of Achaia. Neither of these can therefore be the
Argive sculptor who made the statue and put his name on the pedestal.
But as my learned and much esteemed friend, Professor Stephanos
Kummanudes of Athens, has remarked, it is not astonishing that the name
of an insignificant sculptor should be forgotten, seeing that the names
of so many great kings are lost.

In the same part of the Temple of Athena we found the fragment of a
marble slab, which has evidently been very long, with the inscription
given on the opposite page.

The Proconsul Caius Claudius Nero, the son of Publius, who is praised in
the above inscription, ruled over the province of Asia from 674 to 675
after the foundation of Rome. Hence he lived at the time of Cicero, who
mentions him in his orations against Verres.[256]

The Pœmanenians (Ποιμανηνοί) are the inhabitants of the fortress of
Pœmanenon, to the south of Cyzicus.[257]

To judge from the form and thickness of the stone, this inscription must
have been very long and have contained more than 70 lines. But even the
fragment is of historical value, and all the more as we know for certain
that it comes down to us from the year 80 B.C.

          ΕΠΕΙΤΟΥΑΝΘΥΠΑΤΟΥΓΑΙΟΥΚΛΑΥΔΙΟΥΠΟΠΛΙΟΥΥΙΟΥΝΕΡΩΝΟΣΕΠΙΤΑΞΑΝΤΟΣ
   ΤΟΙΣΠΟΙΜΑΝΗΝΩΝΑΡΧΟΥΣΙΝΕΞΑΠΟΣΤΕΙΛΑΙΠΡΟΣΗΜΑΣΕΙΣΠΑΡΑΦΥΛΑΚΗΝ
   ΤΗΣΠΟΛΕΩΣΣΤΡΑΤΙΩΤΑΣΚΑΙΕΠΑΥΤΩΝΗΓΕΜΟΝΑΣΠΟΙΜΑΝΗΝΩΝ
   ΟΝΤΕΣΗΜΩΝΦΙΛΟΙΚΑΙΕΥΝΟΩΣΔΙΑΚΕΙΜΕΝΟΙΠΡΟΣΤΟΝΔΗΜΟΝΗΜΩΝ
   ΕΞΑΠΕΣΤΕΙΛΑΝΤΟΥΣΤΕΣΤΡΑΤΙΩΤΑΣΚΑΙΕΠΑΥΤΩΝΗΓΕΜΟΝΑΝΙΚ                   5
   ΔΡΟΝΜΗΝΟΦΙΛΟΥΥΙΟΣΚΑΙΠΑΡΑΓΕΝΟΜΕΝΟΣΕΙΣΤΗΝΠΟΛΙΝΗΜΩΝ
   ΤΕΕΝΔΗΜΙΑΝΠΟΙΕΙΤΑΙΚΑΛΗΝΚΑΙΕΥΣΧΗΜΟΝΑΚΑΙΑΞΙΩΣ
   ΡΟΥΔΗΜΟΥΚΑΙΤΗΣΕΑΥΤΟΥΠΑΤΡΙΔΟΣΤΗΝΤΕΤΩΝ
   ΕΑΥΤΩΙΝΕΑΝΙΣΚΩΝΕΝΔΗΜΙΑΝΕΥΤ...ΟΝΠ
   ΤΟΝΚΑΘΑΠΕΡΕΠΙΒΑΛΛΕΙΑΝΔΡ                                      10
   ΧΕΙΡΙΣΜΕΝΗΝΕΑΤΩΙΠΙ
   ΤΗΝΥΠΕΡΤΗΣΦΥΛΑΚ
   ΕΙΣΦΕΡΕΤΑΙΣΠΟΥΔ
   ΕΚΚΑΙΝΩΝΟΥΔΕΙ
   ΜΟΝΚΑΙ                                                    15

          ἐπεὶ τοῦ ἀνθυπάτου Γαΐου Κλαυδίου Ποπλίου υἱοῦ Νέρωνος ἐπιτάξαντος
   τοῖς Ποιμανηνῶν ἄρχουσιν ἐξαποστεῖλαι πρὸς ἡμᾶς εἰς παραφυλακὴν
   τῆς πόλεως στρατιώτας καὶ ἐπ’ αὐτῶν ἡγεμόνας Ποιμανηῶν (οἱ;)
   ὄντες ἡμῶν φίλοι καὶ εὐνόως διακείμενοι πρὸς τὸν δῆμον ἡμῶν
   ἐξαπέστειλαν τούς τε στρατιώτας καὶ ἐπ’ αὐτῶν ἡγεμόνα Νίκ(αν-)           5
   δρον Μηνοφίλου (υἱ)ὸς καὶ παραγενόμενος εἰς τὴν πόλιν ἡμῶν (τήν)
   τε ἐνδημίαν ποιεῖται καλὴν καὶ εὐσχήμονα καὶ ἀξί(ως τοῦ τε ἡμετέ-)
   ρου δήμου καὶ τῆς ἑαυτοῦ πατρίδος, τήν τε τῶν (ὑφ';)
   ἑαυτῷ νεανίσκων ἐνδημίαν εὔτ(ακτ)ον π(αρέχεται καὶ ἑαυ-)
   τὸν καθάπερ ἐπιβάλλει ἀνδρ(ὶ ...... καὶ τὴν ἐξουσίαν τὴν ἐγκε-)         10
   χειρισμένην ἑατῷ πι(στῶς καὶ .............
   τὴν ὑπὲρ τῆς φυλακ(ῆς ..................
   εἰσφέρεται σπουδ(ὴν
   ἐκ καινῶν οὐδει
   μον καὶ                                                    15




CHAPTER XXII.

     Interruptions through festivals--Opening of the tumulus of
     Batiea--Pottery like that of the Trojan stratum at Hissarlik, and
     nothing else--No trace of burial--Its age--Further discoveries of
     burnt Trojan houses--Proof of their successive ages--Their
     construction--Discovery of a double gateway, with the copper bolts
     of the gates--The “SCÆAN GATE” of Homer--Tests of the extent of
     ancient Troy--The place where Priam sat to view the Greek
     forces--Homer’s knowledge of the heroic Troy only
     traditional--Description of the gates, the walls, and the “PALACE
     OF PRIAM."--Vases, &c., found in Priam’s house--Copper, ivory, and
     other implements--The δέπα ἀμφικύπελλα--Houses discovered on the
     north platform--Further excavations of the city walls--Statuettes
     and vessels of the Greek period--Top of the Tower of Ilium
     uncovered, and its height determined--A curious trench in it,
     probably for the archers--Further excavations at Bunarbashi: only a
     few fragments of Greek pottery--The site of Ilium uninhabited since
     the end of the fourth century--The place confused with Alexandria
     Troas--No Byzantine remains at Hissarlik--Freshness of the Greek
     sculptures.

Pergamus of Troy, May 10th, 1873.


Since my report of the 16th of last month I have had many interruptions,
for the Greek Easter festival lasts six days, then the feast of Saint
George and its after celebrations again took away several days, so that
during all this time I have had only four days of actual work; however,
on these days, with on an average 150 men, I have continued the works
with great energy.

As we have had continual fine weather since the beginning of April, my
men no longer go to the neighbouring villages for the night as they have
hitherto done; but they sleep in the open air and even in the
excavations, which is very convenient for me, as I now have them always
at hand. Besides this, the long days are of great advantage to me, for I
can continue work from a quarter to five till a quarter past seven in
the evening.

On the top of the tumulus, which is half an hour distant from the
Pergamus, and which, according to the Iliad (II. 811-815), was called by
men the tomb of Batiea, and by the gods the tomb of Myrina, I have had a
shaft sunk, 10¾ feet broad and 17½ feet long; and I find that the
layer of soil there is scarcely more than ¾ of an inch thick, and then
follows brown earth as hard as stone, which alternates with strata of
calcareous earth. In the brown earth I found a mass of fragments of
brilliant black, green, and brown vases, of the same description as
those which I find here in the Pergamus at a depth of from 8 to 10
meters (26 to 33 feet); also many fragments of jars (πίθοι). Beyond
these I discovered nothing at all, and at a depth of 4½ meters
(13¾ feet) I came upon the white limestone rock. What is most
surprising to me is that I did not even find any charcoal, much less the
bones of the burnt corpse. That I should have missed the traces of the
funeral pile, if such really existed, is inconceivable to me, when I
consider the size of my cutting and of its perpendicular walls.

Now, although I have failed in the actual object of this excavation,
still it has this important result for archæology, that, by means of all
the fragments of pottery discovered there, it enables us to determine
with some degree of certainty the date of the erection of this mound;
for it evidently belongs to a time when the surface of the Pergamus was
from 26 to 33 feet lower than it is now. It is therefore of the same
date as the Tower-road already described, which is paved with large
flags of stone, and above which I have carried on the excavations with
the greatest industry. I finished these excavations to-day. They have
brought to light two large buildings of different ages, the more recent
of which is erected upon the ruins of the more ancient one. Both have
been destroyed by terrible fires, of which the walls bear distinct
traces; moreover all the rooms of both houses are filled with black,
red, and yellow wood-ashes and with charred remains. The more recent
house was erected when the ruins of the more ancient house were
perfectly covered with ashes and with burnt _débris_, as is obvious from
the fact that the more recent walls run in all directions above the more
ancient ones, never standing directly upon them, and are frequently
separated from them by a layer of calcined _débris_, from 6½ to 10
feet high. The lower, as well as the upper house, is built of stones
joined with earth, but the walls of the lower house are much thicker and
much more solidly built than those of the upper one. The Tower-road can
only have been used when the more ancient house was still inhabited, for
it leads directly into it, and the more recent house was not built till
the street was covered to a height of 10 feet by the ruins of the more
ancient house.

[Illustration: No. 218. Copper Bolts, found exactly in the middle (_a_)
of the first (_b_) of the second Scæan Gates.]

[Illustration:

PLATE XII.

Tower of Ilium.
Wall of Débris.
Scæan Gate and Paved Road.
Wall of Troy.
Ruins of the Palace of Priam.

_Page 303._

THE DOUBLE SCÆAN GATE, PALACE OF PRIAM, AND TOWER OF ILIUM.

From the North-West.]

I was firmly convinced that this splendid street, paved with large flags
of stone, must proceed from the principal building of the Pergamus, and
I therefore confidently carried on the excavation in order to bring that
edifice to light. To accomplish this, I was most unfortunately compelled
to break down three of the large walls of the more recent house. The
result has, however, far surpassed my expectations, for I not only found
two large gates, standing 20 feet apart, but also the two large copper
bolts belonging to them, of which I give drawings. The first gate is
12¼ feet broad, and is formed by two projections of the wall, one of
which stands out 2½ feet, the other 2¾ feet; both are 3¼ feet
high, and 3¾ feet broad. The street paved with the large flags of
stone ends at the first gate, and the road from this to the second gate,
which is situated a little more than 20 feet further to the north-east,
is very roughly paved with large unhewn stones. The pavement has
probably become uneven through the walls of the more ancient house
having fallen upon it. (_See Plan II., and Plates XII. and XIII._)

The second gate is likewise formed by two projections in the wall, which
are 2 feet high, above 3 feet broad, and project about 2½ feet.

I have cleared the street as far as 5 feet to the north-east of the
second gate, but I have not ventured to proceed further, as this could
not be done without breaking down more of the walls of the second house,
the preservation of which is of the greatest interest to archæology.
For, although it must be of a much more recent date than the lower one
upon the ruins of which it stands, yet, as is proved by the terra-cottas
and the idols with owls’ heads, as well as by its position at a depth of
from 6 to 7 meters (20 to 23 feet) below the surface, it was built
centuries before the time of the Greek settlement, the ruins of which
extend only to a depth of 6½ feet. This upper and later house is
therefore certainly older than the Homeric poems.

In my last report I expressed the firm conviction that the Tower-road,
which inclines abruptly towards the Plain to the south-west, must lead
to the Scæan Gate, which I thought could at most be 492 feet distant. I
now venture positively to assert that the great double gate which I have
brought to light must necessarily be the SCÆAN GATE. For in the mound,
which runs out for to the south-west from the foot of the Pergamus and
in a straight line with the Tower-road--which mound I had supposed to
contain the great city wall of Ilium and the Scæan Gate,--in this
mound, close to the main hill, I have sunk a shaft, nearly 6 feet broad
and 11 feet long. Here I found exclusively Greek fragments of pottery,
and I came upon the rock at the small depth of 7½ feet; thus I
convinced myself that ancient Troy can never have extended so far
towards the Plain. A second excavation, 11¼ feet long and 6½ feet
broad, which I made exactly 443 feet further to the east up the plateau,
had a similar result, for I came upon the rock at a depth of 16½
feet, and here also I found exclusively fragments of Hellenic pottery
(which in the Pergamus I meet with only at a depth of 6½ feet), and
no trace of Trojan pottery.

This sufficiently proves that the ancient city cannot even have extended
as far as this point, and its area must have been connected with the
Pergamus still further eastwards.[258] I am at present occupied in
making fifteen other shafts in this direction, and I hope, in spite of
the great depth I have to sink them, that I shall succeed, at least to
some extent, in determining the topography of Troy. I shall leave all
the shafts open, so that every visitor may convince himself about the
truth of my statements.

Meanwhile the two shafts described above have gained this much for
archæology, that the street which runs down abruptly at an angle of 65
degrees towards the Plain, in a south-western direction from the double
gate and the Great Tower, cannot possibly have led to a second gate, so
that the double gate which I have laid bare must necessarily have been
the Scæan Gate; it is in an excellent state of preservation, not a stone
of it is wanting.

Here, therefore, by the side of the double gate, upon Ilium’s Great
Tower, at the edge of the very abrupt western declivity of the Pergamus,
sat Priam, the seven elders of the city, and Helen; and this is the
scene of the most splendid passage in the Iliad.[259] From this spot
the company surveyed the whole Plain, and saw at the foot of the
Pergamus the Trojan and the Achæan armies face to face about to settle
their agreement to let the war be decided by a single combat between
Paris and Menelaus.

When Homer[260] makes Hector descend from the Pergamus and rush through
the city in order to arrive at the Scæan Gate, this can only have arisen
from the fact that, after the destruction of Troy, the gate, as well as
the street which led down from it to the Plain, were covered with a
layer of _débris_ 10 feet thick, so that the names only were known from
tradition, and their actual site was unknown.

In order not to weary the reader with a detailed description of the
Scæan Gate, I give an exact plan of it, where all the details may be
seen. (Plan III., p. 306.) This gate, as well as the large ancient
building, stands upon the wall or buttress already mentioned as leaning
on the north side of the Tower. At this place the buttress appears to be
about 79 feet thick, and to be made of the _débris_ which was broken off
the primary soil when the Tower was erected. The site of this building,
upon an artificial elevation directly above the gate, together with its
solid structure, leave no doubt that it was the grandest building in
Troy; nay, that it must have been the PALACE OF PRIAM.[261] I am having
an accurate plan made, so far as I can, of the portion that has been
laid bare; I cannot, however, bring to light the whole of it, for in
order to do this I should have to pull down both my stone and my wooden
house, beneath which it extends; and even if I did pull down my own
houses, I should still be unable to make a complete plan of the house
till I had removed the building which stands upon it, and this I cannot
at once make up my mind to do.

[Illustration: PLAN III.--THE TOWER AND THE SCÆAN GATE.

_a a._ The Great Tower of Ilium. _b._ Depression to shelter archers.
_c._ Steps. _d._ The Double Scæan Gate. _e._ Steep paved road leading to
the Plain. _f._ The City Wall. _g._ Place where the Treasure was found.
_h h._ The Palace of Priam.]

Anyone may convince himself that the elevation, upon which stands the
Palace of King Priam above the Scæan Gate, is in reality an artificial
one, by examining my last year’s great cutting, which pierces through a
portion of this elevation. The walls of that cutting, from the shaft as
far as the gate, show that the mound consists of the native earth which
has been thrown up, mixed with fragments of rare pottery and shells.

[Illustration: No. 219. Wonderful Vase of Terra-cotta from the Palace of
Priam (8 M.).[262]]

Now, with regard to the objects found in these houses, I must first of
all mention having discovered, at a depth of 26 feet, in the palace of
Priam, a splendid and brilliant brown vase, 24¼ inches high, with a
figure of the tutelar goddess of Troy, that is, with her owl’s head, two
breasts, a splendid necklace, indicated by an engraved pattern, a very
broad and beautifully engraved girdle, and other very artistic
decorations; there are no arms, nor are there any indications of them.
Unfortunately this exquisite vase has suffered from the weight of stones
which lay upon it, and although I myself cut it with a knife from among
the stones and the stone-hard _débris_ with the greatest care, I did not
succeed in getting it out without breaking it to pieces. I have,
however, carefully collected all the fragments and sent them to Athens
to be put together, that I may give a drawing of it. (This is No. 219.)

[Illustration: No. 220. Terra-cotta Vase from the House of Priam, with
remarkable Decorations (9 M.).]

Among the very remarkable vases discovered in this palace, I must also
mention one nearly a foot high, with two handles, and an encircling row
of cuneiform engravings, above which, on both sides, there is a very
prominent decoration, in the form of spectacles, which is connected with
a kind of necklace by an engraved tree. I must further draw special
attention to an exceedingly remarkable vase, which was found in the same
house, and upon which there are actual letters in a circle round it.
One piece of the vase is wanting, and with it a portion of the
inscription; but, in order to lay before the reader all that has been
preserved of it, I give the inscription separately, for it would be
impossible to give it accurately on the drawing of the vase. (See No. 3,
p. 23.) It would please me immensely if anyone could decipher the Trojan
writing, and thus throw some light upon the great people to whom it
belonged, and upon the epoch at which it was written.[263] I must also
draw attention to a vase, upon which at first sight it seems as if there
were a row of letters; at a closer examination, however, it appears not
to be writing, but symbolical signs, as the cross is conspicuous in
almost every figure.[264]

[Illustration: No. 221. A Terra-cotta Vase with two little Ears, and two
large perforated Handles, marked with eleven strange characters (5½
M.).

The _depth_ must refer to the _upper house_ above the Palace. it is
given as 8½ M. in the Photograph, but corrected in the descriptive
letter-press to 5½ M.; and a like correction seems to have been
neglected in the Book.--{ED.}]

[Illustration: No. 222. A splendidly-decorated Vase of Terra-cotta, with
three Feet and two Ears. From the Palace (7½ M.).]

[Illustration: No. 223. A Terra-cotta Vase, with two Ears and covered
with dots. From the Palace (7 M.).]

In the same house I found three brilliant red vases, with two handles, a
prominent decoration on either side in the form of spectacles, and two
mighty wings, standing erect by the side of the neck;--half-a-dozen
vases of various sizes, with uncommonly long tubes at the sides and with
holes in the mouth for suspending them by strings;--a very large and
brilliant black vase, with two handles and two ornaments in the form of
large ears;--likewise a smaller vase, with large perforated ears for the
string by which it was hung up;--a vase with three feet, rings for
hanging it up, and beautiful engraved decorations, namely, two
encircling stripes with zigzag lines, and five lines round the neck.
(No. 222.) Further, I found a vase rounded at the bottom, with
perforated handles, and completely covered with dots (No. 223);--also
two covers with pretty owls’ heads, one of which has remarkably large
eyes;--also a fragment of the fore part of a vase with a sheep’s
head;--a curious small but very broad vase, with three feet and long
tubes for hanging it up by strings;--a peculiar terra-cotta lamp, with a
perforated handle in the form of a crescent, and two other projecting
handles, with tubes for suspension;--a red jug with a handle, a neck
completely bent back, a beak-shaped mouth, and two eyes;[265]--a small
vase, covered with dots and possessing two handles and two immense erect
ears;--a jug, with two female breasts;--a vase, with the owl’s face and
the body of the Ilian Athena, and two upraised arms;--also the upper
portion of another vase, upon which may be seen a mouth below the beak
of the Trojan tutelary goddess; and a vase, with a large hollow foot,
very long tubes at the sides for hanging it up, and two prominent
decorations in the form of spectacles.

[Illustration: No. 224. Fine decorated Vase of Terra-Cotta, with two
Handles and two great upright Wings. From the Palace (7½ M.).]

Among the smaller terra-cottas found in the palace of Priam, I have
particularly to mention a vessel 2¾ inches long, in a human form,
with the owl’s head of the Ilian Athena and unusually large eyes: two
lines on the temples appear to indicate the helmet, three horizontal
lines on the neck her armour.[266] The body is covered with an arched
shield 1½ inch long, upon which there are ten rows of dots, which are
probably intended to represent the heads of the small nails with which
the layers (πτύχες) were fastened together; the shield of Ajax, for
instance, consisted of seven layers of hides and an outer case of
copper.[267] The Trojan goddess carries on both sides a large wing, in
the form of a bottle, which is decorated with horizontal lines. The long
hair at the back of the goddess’s head is very distinct; it is gathered
into a plait, and falls down almost as far as her ankles, and is wrought
with great care, reminding one extremely of the very similar plaits of
the Caryatides in the Erechtheum of the Acropolis of Athens. Not only is
the idol hollow, but so also are the wings; the latter must positively
have some symbolical significance.

In the palace of Priam I further met with four marble and three bone
idols, with the owl’s head of the tutelar goddess of Troy: one of the
bone idols is painted with a white colour. I likewise discovered there
ten marble idols, without the owl’s head; also the fragment of a sword,
as well as of a lance, a knife, and some copper implements; further, a
dozen long, thin copper nails, which must have served as hair or dress
pins; besides these, a packet of five dress pins, which have been molten
together in the heat of the conflagration: one of the pins has two
heads, one above the other, the lower head being perfectly round. I also
discovered here a perforated cylinder, 1¾ inch long, made of blue
felspar, and ornamented all round with extremely remarkable engraved
symbols. I there also discovered an extremely curious ivory article,
which must be part of a musical instrument;[268] six sling bullets of
loadstone and an arrow-head.

[Illustration: No. 225. Five Copper Dress Pins, molten together by the
conflagration. From the Palace (8 M.).]

[Illustration: No. 226. Engraved Cylinder of blue Felspar. From the
Palace (9 M.).[269]]

[Illustration: No. 227. Terra-cotta, engraved with ten rude Owls’ Faces.
From the Palace (8 M.).]

Of 210 whorls found in the Palace adorned with Aryan religious symbols,
there are 60 with engravings that I have not hitherto met with, and
three terra-cotta balls with symbolical signs. One of these is
especially remarkable[270]: it has ten roughly-engraved owls’ faces, so
coarsely drawn that I should not even know them to be owls’ faces, were
it not that I have occasionally found just as rude representations of
the owl’s head upon idols. I also discovered in the same house six
beautifully-polished axes of diorite; also one of those round
twice-perforated terra-cottas, arched on both sides and flattened on the
edge of one side, the whole of this flat side being filled with a stamp
bearing the impression of an eagle and a stag or an antelope; further,
four of those frequently-described large red goblets, round below and
with two large handles, which can only stand on the mouth. These four
goblets are, unfortunately, all broken, and I shall not be able to have
them repaired till I return to Athens.

I now venture positively to maintain that these goblets, which, from my
former reports and drawings are known to be from 5 to nearly 16 inches
high, must necessarily be the Homeric “δέπα ἀμφικύπελλα,” and that the
usual interpretation of these words by “_double cups, with a common
bottom in the centre_,” is entirely erroneous. It really appears as if
this wrong translation arose solely through Aristotle; for, as is clear
from his _Hist. Anim._ (9, 40), there were in his time double cups with
a common bottom in the centre; and, in fact, many years ago it is said
that such a cup was discovered in Attica, and bought by the Museum in
Copenhagen. But in the Homeric Troy there were no such cups, otherwise I
should have found them. As already remarked in one of my previous
reports (p. 129), I found on the primary soil, at a depth of from 46 to
52½ feet, several fragments of brilliant black goblets, which I then
considered to be fragments of double cups, because there was a hollow
upon both sides of the bottom; but the one hollow was in all cases quite
small in comparison with the other, and must, therefore, have been in
the foot of the cup. If δέπας ἀμφικύπελλον means _double cup_, then
ἀμφιφορεύς must mean _double urn_, which is not possible either in the
Iliad (XIII. 92), the Odyssey (XXIV. 74), or elsewhere in Homer;
moreover, it has never occurred to anyone to translate it otherwise than
“urn with two handles;” consequently, δέπας ἀμφικύπελλον cannot be
translated otherwise than by “cup with two handles.” As an actual double
cup can, of course, only be filled on one side at a time, Homer would
certainly never have constantly described the filled cup as a double
cup, for there would have been no sense in the name. By the term
ἀμφικύπελλον, however, he wished to signify that the filled cup was
presented by one handle and accepted by the other handle. Interpreted in
this manner, there is a great deal of meaning in the name.[271]

The palace of King Priam furnished me also with two large fragments of a
large brilliant yellow urn, adorned in the most beautiful manner with
engraved decorations. Among others, it has several rows of circles
running round it, in each of which there is a triple cross. The elegance
of the vessel is enhanced by the broad handles, which also have circles
with triple crosses. In the king’s palace I also discovered the handle
of a vessel, broken off; it is 4¼ inches long, and in the form of a
serpent.

In the upper and more recent house, above the Scæan Gate, I found the
vase here represented, which is pointed below, has two handles and
decorations in the form of spectacles (No. 228); also the beautiful
vase, with four handles and a lid (No. 229); the large jug, with one
large and two small handles (No. 230); and a number of other vases and
jugs which I shall not describe, as they have already been frequently
met with. Of idols with owls’ faces I have found only one. There also I
discovered many fragments of those large red goblets with two handles,
which I now recognise to be the Homeric δέπας ἀμφικύπελλον.

[Illustration: No. 228. Terra-cotta Vase, with a curious Decoration.
From the upper and later House above the Scæan Gate (6 M.).]

[Illustration: No. 229. Terra-cotta Vase, with four Handles and a Lid.
From the upper House above the Scæan Gate (6 M.).]

[Illustration: No. 230. A great Jug, with Handle and two Ears. From the
upper House above the Scæan Gate (6 M.).]

As the excavation above the Scæan Gate is finished, I am now again
vigorously at work on the great platform on the north side, which I have
lately had worked whenever I had workmen to spare. We now come upon
several houses there at a depth of from 33 to 20 feet; also, as it
seems, upon a great wall of fortification in the lower strata.

As it is extremely important to know what were the fortifications on the
west and north-west of the Pergamus at the time of the Trojan war, and
as I see another wall, 11½ feet thick, running in a north-western
direction from the Scæan Gate, which however it is impossible to follow
from this side,--during the last eight days I have been making a
cutting, 33 feet broad and 141 long, on the north-west side of the hill,
at the point where, in April 1870, I made the first cutting, which
therefore my men call ἡ μάμμη τῶν ἀνασκαφῶν ("the grandmother of the
excavations”). I am having the _débris_ removed simultaneously by a
small platform, made at a depth of 34¼ feet on the declivity of the
hill, and by three galleries. The distance is not great, and the
wheel-barrows proceed across level ground, and moreover the _débris_
here is very light, and only requires to be thrown down the declivity;
so the work advances very rapidly. Upon the lower platform I came upon
the surrounding wall built by Lysimachus, which is 13 feet high and 10
feet thick, and is composed of large hewn blocks of limestone laid upon
one another without any kind of cement. I have just finished breaking
through this wall. Directly behind it I came upon an older wall, 8¾
feet high and 6 feet thick, which is composed of large hewn stones
joined with earth, and which of course I am also having broken through.
This second wall is immediately followed by that wall of large hewn
stones which I laid bare three years ago, and which I have hitherto
regarded as a bastion; it is, however, probable that it will prove to be
something else, and I shall describe it in detail in my next report.

This part of the Pergamus was evidently much lower in ancient times; as
seems to be proved not only by the surrounding wall, which must at one
time have risen to a considerable height above the surface of the hill,
whereas it is now covered with 16½ feet of _débris_, but also by the
remains of the Hellenic period, which here extend down to a great depth.
It appears, in fact, as if the rubbish and refuse of habitations had
been thrown down here for centuries, in order to increase the height of
the place. This also explains how it is that I find here a quantity of
small but interesting objects from the Greek period. Among others are 24
heads of terra-cotta figures, 17 of which are of great beauty; also a
great number of other fragments of statuettes of the same description,
which display skilful workmanship; a terra-cotta slab 5½ inches in
length, upon which is a representation of a woman; also eight small
terra-cotta slabs, nearly 2 inches in length, upon which I find very
curious and to me utterly unknown objects in high relief.[272] I also
found here the fragments of some vessels of exquisite workmanship; two
beautifully decorated lamps; and a leaden plate, 2¾ inches long and
broad, with a pig’s head in bas-relief, which, as I conjecture, may have
been a coin. We also discovered here a vessel 28¾ inches long, of an
extremely fanciful shape, with a long and very thin foot, a long thin
neck, and two enormous handles.

[Illustration: No. 231. A remarkable Terra-cotta Cup (4 M.).]

Upon the great platform, at a depth of 4 meters (13 feet), we found a
very remarkable cup, which has a handle, and in its hollow foot four
oval holes, pierced opposite to one another. Last year I repeatedly
found the feet of cups of this sort at a depth of from 46 to 52½
feet, but hitherto I have never met with an entire goblet of this form.

As I no longer require the surface of the Tower for removing the
_débris_, I have had it quite cleared, and I find in the centre of it a
depression, 45¼ feet long, from 8¼ to 14¾ feet broad, and
barely 3 feet deep, which may have been used for the archers.[273] It
has now become evident to me that what I last year considered to be the
ruins of a second storey of the Great Tower are only benches made of
stones joined with earth, three of which may be seen rising behind one
another like steps.[274] From this, as well as from the walls of the
Tower and those of the Scæan Gate, I perceive that the Tower never can
have been higher than it now is.

The excavations of the north side of the field belonging to Mr. Calvert,
which I opened to discover other sculptures, have been stopped for some
time, as I can no longer come to terms with him. At present, I have only
two foremen, for I was obliged to dismiss Georgios Photidas, three weeks
ago, for urgent reasons.

In conclusion, I have to mention that, during the Greek Easter festival,
accompanied by my esteemed friend, Judge Schells of Ratisbon, and my
wife, I visited Bunarbashi and the neighbouring heights. In their
presence, I made some small excavations, and I have proved that even in
the village the accumulation of _débris_ amounts only to 1¾ foot in
the court-yards of the buildings, and that upon and beside the street
there is nothing but the virgin earth; further, that upon the small site
of Gergis, at the end of the heights, which was formerly regarded as
identical with Troy, the naked rock projects everywhere; and besides, in
the accumulation of _débris_, which nowhere amounts to 1¾ foot in the
town itself, and to only a little more in the Acropolis, I found nothing
but fragments of pottery from the Hellenic period, that is, from the
third and fifth centuries B.C.

I must also add that I now positively retract my former opinion, that
Ilium was inhabited up to the ninth century after Christ, and I must
distinctly maintain that its site has been desolate and uninhabited
since the end of the fourth century. I had allowed myself to be deceived
by the statements of my esteemed friend, Mr. Frank Calvert, of the
Dardanelles, who maintained that there were documents to prove that the
place had been inhabited up to the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries
after Christ. Such documents, if they really do exist, must necessarily
refer to Alexandria Troas, which is always, as for instance in the New
Testament, simply called Troas; for on its site quantities of Byzantine
antiquities are found even on the surface, which seem to prove that the
city was inhabited up to the fourteenth century, or still longer. Here
in Ilium, on the other hand, there is no trace of Byzantine
architecture, of Byzantine sculpture, of Byzantine pottery, or of
Byzantine coins. Altogether I found only two copper medals of Byzantine
monasteries, which may have been lost by shepherds. I found hundreds of
coins belonging to the time of Constantine the Great, Constans II., but
no medals whatever of the later emperors.

As hitherto it was in the Pergamus alone that I found no trace of the
Byzantine period, I thought that it was only the fortress that was
uninhabited during that period, but that the region of the city had been
occupied. But my fifteen shafts, which I am having made on the most
various points of the site of Ilium, as well as the two shafts made upon
the primary soil, prove, as anyone may convince himself, that below the
surface there is no trace of the Byzantine period, nay that, beyond a
very thin layer of earth, which however only exists in some parts, the
ruins of the Greek period extend up to the very surface, and that in
several of the shafts I came upon the walls of Greek houses even on the
surface.

It is impossible that a Byzantine town or a Byzantine village, nay, that
even a single Byzantine house, can have stood upon this hilly and
stone-hard ground, which covers the ruins of a primeval city, without
leaving the most distinct traces of its existence, for here, where for
nine or ten months of the year it never rains, except during rare
thunderstorms, the productions of human industry do not become
weather-beaten and destroyed, as in other countries where there is
frequent rain. The very fragments of sculptures and inscriptions, which
I find here in the Pergamus and in the other districts of the city, upon
the surface, and which have lain exposed to the open air for at least
1500 years, are still almost as fresh as if they had been made
yesterday.

Trusting to the statements of Mr. Frank Calvert, and under the
impression that Ilium had been inhabited for a long time under the
Byzantine dominion, I described the wall, composed of Corinthian pillars
and cement, 10 feet thick, and which gave me so much trouble to break
through at the south-east corner of the Pergamus, as of Byzantine
architecture. (Pp. 230, 250.) I am now, however, forced to believe that
the Temple of Athena, to which these pillars belong, was destroyed by
the religious zeal of the first Christians as early as the reign of
Constantine the Great, or at latest during that of Constantine II., and
that this wall was built of its ruins about the same time.

[Illustration:

No. 232 (8 M.).   No. 233 (7 M.).

Curious Terra-cottas from the Trojan Stratum. Dr. Schliemann takes No.
232 for a pair of pegs for hanging up clothes. No. 233 is a strange
animal figure, solid, except for a tube passing through the body and
open at both ends, so that it cannot have been a vessel. Dr. Schliemann
thinks it may represent the _chimæra_ (_Iliad_, VI. 179, foll., “In
front a lion, behind a serpent, and in the middle a chimæra”). In one
sense, certainly, the name seems appropriate.]

[Illustration:

PLATE XIII.

Samothrace.
Imbros.
Dr. Schliemann’s Houses.
Plain of Troy, seen through the great Trench.
Later but Pre-Hellenic Buildings, partly over the Ruins of Priam’s Palace.
TOWER OF ILIUM.
Paved Road.
Wall of Troy, Scæan Gate, and Paved Road to the Plain.
_a_ Place where the Treasure was found.
Greek Tower (where the man stands).
Scamander.
Plain of Troy.
Hellespont.

_Page 321._

THE SCÆAN GATE AND PAVED ROAD, THE TOWER OF ILIUM, CITY WALL, PALACE OF
PRIAM, AND THE WALLS OF A TOWER OF THE GREEK AGE.

From the South-East.]




CHAPTER XXIII.

     Further discoveries of fortifications--The _great discovery of the_
     TREASURE _on the city wall_--Expedient for its preservation--The
     articles of the Treasure described--The Shield--The Caldron--Bottle
     and Vases of Gold--The golden δέπας ἀμφικύπελλον--Modes of working
     the gold--A cup of electrum--Silver plates, probably the _talents_
     of Homer--Vessels of Silver--Copper lance-heads: their peculiar
     form--Copper battle-axes--Copper daggers--Metal articles fused
     together by the conflagration--A knife and a piece of a
     sword--Signs of the Treasure having been packed in a wooden
     chest--The Key found--The Treasure probably left behind in an
     effort to escape--Other articles found near the Treasure--The
     thousands of gold jewels found in a silver vase--The two golden
     Diadems--The ear-rings, bracelets, and finger-rings--The smaller
     jewels of gold--Analysis of the copper articles by M.
     Landerer--Discovery of another room in the Palace containing an
     inscribed stone, and curious terra-cottas--Silver dishes--Greek
     terra-cotta figures--Great abundance of the owl-faced vases.

     Limited extent of Troy--Its walls traced--Poetic exaggerations of
     Homer--_The one great point of_ TROY’S _reality established_--It
     was as large as the primitive Athens and Mycenæ--The wealth and
     power of Troy--Great height of its houses--Probable
     population--Troy known to Homer only by tradition--Question of a
     Temple in Homer’s time--Characteristics of the Trojan stratum of
     remains, and their difference from those of the lowest stratum--The
     former opinion on this point recalled--Layer of metallic _scoriæ_
     through the whole hill--Error of Strabo about the utter destruction
     of Troy--Part of the real Troy unfortunately destroyed in the
     earlier excavations; but many Trojan houses brought to light
     since--The stones of Troy not used in building other cities--The
     Trojan houses of sun-dried bricks, except the most important
     buildings, which are of stones and earth--Extent and results of the
     excavations--Advice to future explorers.

     Further excavations on the North side--Very curious terra-cotta
     vessels--Perforated vases--A terra-cotta with hieroglyphics--Heads
     of oxen and horses; their probable significance--Idols of the Ilian
     Athena--Greek and Roman medals--Greek inscriptions--Final close of
     the excavations: thanksgiving for freedom from serious
     accidents--Commendations of Nicolaus Saphyros Jannakis, and other
     assistants, and of the artist Polychronios Tempesis and the
     engineer Adolphe Laurent.


Troy, June 17th, 1873.

Since my report of the 10th of last month I have been especially anxious
to hasten the great excavation on the north-west side of the hill, and
for this purpose I have made a deep cutting on the west side also, in
which, unfortunately, I came obliquely upon the enclosing wall of
Lysimachus, which is 13 feet high and 10 feet thick. I was therefore
compelled to break out from this wall a double quantity of stones in
order to gain an entrance; but I again came upon the ruins of colossal
buildings of the Hellenic and pre-Hellenic periods, so that this
excavation can only proceed slowly. Here, at a distance of 69 feet from
the declivity of the hill, at a depth of 20 feet, I met with an ancient
enclosure 5 feet high, and with a projecting battlement. It is not
connected with the wall which runs out from the Scæan Gate in a
north-westerly direction, and, on account of its very different
structure and small height, it must belong to a post-Trojan period. In
any case, however, it is much older than the Greek colony, because it is
built of stones and earth, and because I found by the side of it several
marble idols of the tutelar goddess of Ilium. I am, unfortunately,
obliged to break down a portion of this wall to a length of 17½ feet,
in order to proceed further, but I have left standing nearly 8 feet of
the part I have excavated, so that the wall may be examined. Behind it I
found a level place paved partly with large flags of stone, partly with
stones more or less hewn, and after this a wall of fortification 20 feet
high and 5 feet thick, built of large stones and earth; it runs below my
wooden house, but 6½ feet above the Trojan city wall which proceeds
from the Scæan Gate.

In the new large excavation on the north-west side, which is connected
with the one I have just been describing, I have convinced myself that
the splendid wall of large hewn stones, which I uncovered in April 1870,
belongs to a tower, the lower projecting part of which must have been
built during the first period of the Greek colony, whereas its upper
portion seems to belong to the time of Lysimachus. (See Plate XIII.) To
this tower also belongs the wall that I mentioned in my last report as 9
feet high and 6 feet broad, and as continuous with the surrounding wall
of Lysimachus; and so does the wall of the same dimensions, situated 49
feet from it, which I have likewise broken through. Behind the latter,
at a depth of from 26 to 30 feet, I uncovered the Trojan city wall which
runs out from the Scæan Gate.

In excavating this wall further and directly by the side of the palace
of King Priam,[275] I came upon a large copper article of the most
remarkable form, which attracted my attention all the more as I thought
I saw gold behind it. On the top of this copper article lay a stratum of
red and calcined ruins, from 4¾ to 5¼ feet thick, as hard as
stone, and above this again lay the above-mentioned wall of
fortification (6 feet broad and 20 feet high) which was built of large
stones and earth, and must have belonged to an early date after the
destruction of Troy. In order to withdraw the Treasure from the greed of
my workmen, and to save it for archæology, I had to be most expeditious,
and although it was not yet time for breakfast, I immediately had
“_païdos_” called. This is a word of uncertain derivation, which has
passed over into Turkish, and is here employed in place of ἀνάπαυσις, or
time for rest. While the men were eating and resting, I cut out the
Treasure with a large knife, which it was impossible to do without the
very greatest exertion and the most fearful risk of my life, for the
great fortification-wall, beneath which I had to dig, threatened every
moment to fall down upon me. But the sight of so many objects, every one
of which is of inestimable value to archæology, made me foolhardy, and I
never thought of any danger. It would, however, have been impossible
for me to have removed the Treasure without the help of my dear wife,
who stood by me ready to pack the things which I cut out in her shawl
and to carry them away.[276]

The first thing I found was a large copper shield (the ἀσπὶς ὀμφαλόεσσα
of Homer) in the form of an oval salver, in the middle of which is a
knob or boss encircled by a small furrow (αὔλαξ). This shield is a
little less than 20 inches in length; it is quite flat, and surrounded
by a rim (ἄντυξ) 1½ inch high; the boss (ὀμφαλός) is 2-1/3 inches
high and 4-1/3 inches in diameter; the furrow encircling it is 7 inches
in diameter and 2/5 of an inch deep.[277]

[Illustration:

PLATE XIV.

No. 235.--Great Copper Caldron (λέβης).

No. 234.--A Copper Shield with a boss (ἀσπὶς ὀμφαλόεσσα).

THE TREASURE OF PRIAM.

_Page 324._
]

[Illustration:

PLATE XV.

No. 236.--Curious Plate of Copper (perhaps a Hasp of the Chest), with
Discs fixed on one end, and a Silver Vase welded to the other by the
conflagration.

No. 237.--Bottle of pure Gold, weighing about 1 lb. Troy.

No. 238. Cup of pure Gold, panelled, weighing 7½ oz. Troy.

THE TREASURE OF PRIAM.

_Page 325._
]

The second object which I got out was a copper caldron with two
horizontal handles, which certainly gives us an idea of the Homeric
λέβης; it is 16½ inches in diameter and 5½ inches high; the bottom
is flat, and is nearly 8 inches in diameter.[278]

The third object was a copper plate 2/5 of an inch thick, 6-1/3 inches
broad, and 17-1/3 inches long; it has a rim about 1/12 of an inch high;
at one end of it there are two immovable wheels with an axle-tree. This
plate is very much bent in two places, but I believe that these
curvatures have been produced by the heat to which the article was
exposed in the conflagration; a silver vase 4¾ inches high and broad
has been fused to it; I suppose, however, that this also happened by
accident in the heat of the fire.[279] The fourth article I brought out
was a copper vase 5½ inches high and 4-1/3 inches in diameter.
Thereupon followed a globular bottle of the purest gold, weighing 403
grammes (6220 grains, or above 1 lb. troy); it is nearly 6 inches high
and 5½ inches in diameter, and has the commencement of a zigzag
decoration on the neck, which, however, is not continued all round. Then
came a cup, likewise of the purest gold, weighing 226 grammes (7¼ oz.
troy); it is 3½ inches high and 3 inches broad.[280]

[Illustration:

PLATE XVI.

No. 239.--Outside View of the Two-handled Gold Cup.

No. 240.--Inside View of the Two-handled Gold Cup.

REMARKABLE TWO-HANDLED CUP OF PURE GOLD (δέπας ἀμφικύπελλον).

Weighing about 1 lb. 6 oz. Troy.

THE TREASURE OF PRIAM.

_Page 326._
]

Next came another cup of the purest gold, weighing exactly 600 grammes
(about 1 lb. 6 oz. troy);[281] it is 3½ inches high, 7¼ inches
long, and 7-1/5 inches broad; it is in the form of a ship with two large
handles; on one side there is a mouth, 1-1/5 inch broad, for drinking
out of, and another at the other side, which is 2¾ inches broad, and,
as my esteemed friend Professor Stephanos Kumanudes, of Athens, remarks,
the person who presented the filled cup may have first drunk from the
small mouth, as a mark of respect, to let the guest drink from the
larger mouth.[282] This vessel has a foot which projects about 1/12 of
an inch, and is 1-1/3 inch long, and 4/5 of an inch broad. It is
assuredly the Homeric δέπας ἀμφικύπελλον. But I adhere to my supposition
that all of those tall and brilliant red goblets of terra-cotta, in the
form of champagne-glasses with two enormous handles, are also δέπα
ἀμφικύπελλα, and that this form probably existed in gold also. I must
further make an observation which is very important for the history of
art, that the above-mentioned gold δέπας ἀμφικύπελλον is of _cast gold_,
and that the large handles, which are not solid, have been fused on to
it. On the other hand the gold bottle and the gold cup mentioned above
have been _wrought with the hammer_.

[Illustration: No. 241. Bronze Cup used in China for Libations and
Drinking.]

The Treasure further contained a small cup of gold alloyed with 20 per
cent. of silver, that is, the mixed metal called _electrum_.[283] It
weighs 70 grammes (2¼ oz. troy), and is above 3 inches high, and
above 2½ inches broad. Its foot is only 4/5 of an inch high and
nearly an inch broad, and is moreover not quite straight, so that the
cup appears to be meant only to stand upon its mouth.

I also found in the Treasure six pieces of the purest silver in the form
of large knife-blades, having one end rounded, and the other cut into
the form of a crescent; they have all been wrought with the hammer.[284]
The two larger blades are nearly 8½ inches long and 2 inches broad,
and weigh respectively 190 and 183 grammes. The next two pieces are
about 7¼ inches long and 1½ broad, and weigh respectively 174 and
173 grammes. The two other pieces are nearly 7 inches long and 1-1/5
inch broad, and weigh respectively 173 and 171 grammes.[285] It is
extremely probable that these are the Homeric _talents_ (τάλαντα), which
could only have been small, as, for instance, when Achilles offers for
the first prize a woman, for the second a horse, for the third a
caldron, and for the fourth two gold talents.[286]

[Illustration:

PLATE XVII.

No. 242.--Six Blades of Silver (Homeric Talents?).

Nos. 243 & 244.--Two Silver Vases, with caps, and rings for suspending
cords.

No. 245.--A Silver Dish (φιάλη), with a boss in the centre.

No. 246.--A Silver Cup, 3-1/3 in. high and nearly 4 in. wide.

THE TREASURE OF PRIAM.

_Page 328._
]

[Illustration:

PLATE XVIII.

No. 247.--A small Silver Cover.

No. 248.--A small Cup of Electrum, (_i.e._ 4 parts of Gold to 1 of
Silver).

No. 249.--Large Silver Jug, with handle, in which the small Ornaments
were found.

No. 250.--Has part of another Silver Vase welded to it by the fire.

No. 251.--Silver Vase with a quantity of copper fixed to its bottom by
the fire.

VESSELS OF SILVER AND ELECTRUM.

THE TREASURE OF PRIAM.

_Page 329._
]

I also found in the Treasure three great silver vases, the largest of
which is above 8¼ inches high and nearly 8 inches in diameter, and
has a handle 5½ inches in length and 3½ in breadth.[287] The
second vase is 6·9 inches high and nearly 6 inches in diameter; another
silver vase is welded to the upper part of it, of which, however, only
portions have been preserved.[288] The third vase is above 7 inches high
and above 6 inches in diameter; the foot of the vase has a great deal of
copper fused onto it, which must have dripped from the copper objects
contained in the Treasure during the conflagration.[289] All of the
three vases are perfectly round below, and therefore cannot stand
upright without resting against something.

I found, further, a silver goblet above 3-1/3 inches high, the mouth of
which is nearly 4 inches in diameter; also a silver flat cup or dish
(φιάλη) 5½ inches in diameter, and two beautiful small silver vases
of most exquisite workmanship. The larger one, which has two rings on
either side for hanging it up by strings, is nearly 8 inches high with
its hat-shaped lid, and 3½ inches in diameter across the bulge. The
smaller silver vase, with a ring on either side for suspension by a
string, is about 6¾ inches high, with its lid, and above 3 inches
broad.[290]

[Illustration:

No. 252.   No. 253.   No. 254.   No. 255.   No. 256.

Trojan Lance-Heads of Copper.--TR.

No. 256. Copper Lance and Battle-Axe welded together by the
Conflagration. The Pin-hole of the Lance is visible.--TR.]

[Illustration:

No. 257.   No. 258.   No. 259.   No. 260.

Trojan Battle-Axes of Copper--TR.

Nos. 258 and 260 have pieces of other weapons welded onto them by the
fire.]

Upon and beside the gold and silver articles, I found thirteen copper
lances, from nearly 7 to above 12½ inches in length, and from above
1½ to 2-1/3 inches broad at the broadest point; at the lower end of
each is a hole, in which, in most cases, the nail or peg which fastened
the lance to the wooden handle is still sticking. The pin-hole is
clearly visible in a lance-head which the conflagration has welded to a
battle-axe. The Trojan lances were therefore quite different from those
of the Greeks and Romans, for the latter stuck the shaft into the
lance-head, the former fastened the head into the shaft.

I also found fourteen of those copper weapons, which are frequently met
with here, but which have never been discovered elsewhere; at one end
they are pointed but blunt, and at the other they end in a broad edge. I
formerly considered them to be a species of lance, but now after mature
consideration I am convinced that they could have been used only as
battle-axes. They are from above 6 to above 12 inches in length, from
nearly ½ to above ¾ of an inch thick, and from above 1 to nearly 3
inches broad; the largest of them weighs 1365 grammes (about 3 lbs.
avoirdupois). The following cut shows an axe more like those of later
ages.

[Illustration: No. 261. Trojan battle-axe.--TR.]

There were also seven large double-edged copper daggers, with a handle
from about 2 to 2¾ inches long, the end of which is bent round at a
right angle. These handles must at one time have been encased in wood,
for if the cases had been made of bone they would still have been wholly
or partially preserved. The pointed handle was inserted into a piece of
wood, so that the end projected about half an inch beyond it, and this
end was simply bent round. (See page 332.) The largest of these daggers
is 10-2/3 inches in length and above 2 inches broad at the broadest
part; a second dagger, which is above 1¾ inch broad, has the point
broken off, and is now less than 9 inches long, but appears to have been
11 inches; a third dagger is 8-2/3 inches long, and measures above 1¼
inch at the broadest point; a fourth has become completely curled up in
the conflagration, but appears to have been above 11 inches long. Of the
fifth, sixth, and seventh daggers I only discovered the fragments; these
are from nearly 4 to 5-1/3 inches in length. But in a packet of four
lances and battle-axes, which have been welded together in the heat of
the fire, I believe I can recognise another dagger.

Of common one-edged knives I only found one in the Treasure; it is above
6 inches in length. I also found a piece of a sword which is 8-2/3
inches long and nearly 2 inches broad: also a four-cornered copper bar
ending in an edge; it is nearly 15 inches long, and also appears to have
served as a weapon.

[Illustration: Nos. 262, 263, 264, 266, Trojan Two-edged Copper Daggers,
with hooked Stems that have been fastened into Wooden Handles; No. 264
is doubled up by the Conflagration. No. 265, Weapons molten together.
No. 267, a Copper Sword-Blade, with a sharp edge at the end. No. 268, a
Four-sided Copper Bar, ending in a sharp edge.--TR.]

As I found all these articles together, forming a rectangular mass, or
packed into one another, it seems to be certain that they were placed on
the city wall in a wooden chest (φωριαμός), such as those mentioned by
Homer as being in the palace of King Priam.[291] This appears to be the
more certain, as close by the side of these articles I found a copper
key above 4 inches long, the head of which (about 2 inches long and
broad) greatly resembles a large safe-key of a bank. Curiously enough
this key has had a wooden handle; there can be no doubt of this from the
fact that the end of the stalk of the key is bent round at a right
angle, as in the case of the daggers.

[Illustration: No 269. Copper Key, supposed to have belonged to the
Treasure-chest.--TR.]

It is probable that some member of the family of King Priam hurriedly
packed the Treasure into the chest and carried it off without having
time to pull out the key; that when he reached the wall, however, the
hand of an enemy or the fire overtook him, and he was obliged to abandon
the chest, which was immediately covered to a height of from 5 to 6 feet
with the red ashes and the stones of the adjoining royal palace.

Perhaps the articles found a few days previously in a room of the royal
palace, close to the place where the Treasure was discovered, belonged
to this unfortunate person. These articles were a helmet, and a silver
vase 7 inches high and 5½ inches broad, containing an elegant cup of
electrum 4-1/3 inches high and 3½ inches broad. The helmet was broken
in being taken out, but I can have it mended, as I have all the pieces
of it. The two upper portions, composing the crest (φάλος), are
uninjured. Beside the helmet, as before, I found a curved copper pin,
nearly 6 inches in length, which must have been in some way attached to
it, and have served some purpose. (Compare No. 192, p. 281.)

[Illustration:

No. 270.   No. 271.

Cups of Electrum and Silver. Found in the Palace, near the Treasure, 270
inside 271.]

[Illustration: Nos. 272-275. Pieces of Helmet-crests found in a Room of
the Palace.]

At 5 or 6 feet above the Treasure, the successors of the Trojans erected
a fortification wall 20 feet high and 6 feet broad, composed of large
hewn and unhewn stones and earth; this wall extends to within 3¼ feet
of the surface of the hill.

[Illustration:

PLATE XIX.

Nos. 276 and 277.--THE TWO GOLDEN DIADEMS (πλεκταὶ ἀναδέσμαι).

THE TREASURE OF PRIAM.

_Page 335._
]

That the Treasure was packed together at terrible risk of life, and in
the greatest anxiety, is proved among other things also by the contents
of the largest silver vase, at the bottom of which I found two splendid
gold diadems (κρήδεμνα)[292]; a fillet, and four beautiful gold
ear-rings of most exquisite workmanship: upon these lay 56 gold
ear-rings of exceedingly curious form and 8750 small gold rings,
perforated prisms and dice, gold buttons, and similar jewels, which
obviously belonged to other ornaments; then followed six gold bracelets,
and on the top of all the two small gold goblets.[293]

The one diadem consists of a gold fillet, 21-2/3 inches long and nearly
½ an inch broad, from which there hang on either side seven little
chains to cover the temples, each of which has eleven square leaves with
a groove; these chains are joined to one another by four little cross
chains, at the end of which hangs a glittering golden idol of the
tutelar goddess of Troy, nearly an inch long. The entire length of each
of these chains, with the idols, amounts to 10¼ inches. Almost all
these idols have something of the human form, but the owl’s head with
the two large eyes cannot be mistaken; their breadth at the lower end is
about 9/10 of an inch. Between these ornaments for the temples there are
47 little pendant chains adorned with square leaves; at the end of each
little chain is an idol of the tutelary goddess of Ilium, about ¾ of
an inch long; the length of these little chains with the idols is not
quite 4 inches.

The other diadem is 20 inches long, and consists of a gold chain, from
which are suspended on each side eight chains completely covered with
small gold leaves, to hang down over the temples, and at the end of
every one of the sixteen chains there hangs a golden idol 1¼ inch
long, with the owl’s head of the Ilian tutelary goddess. Between these
ornaments for the temples there are likewise 74 little chains, about 4
inches long, covered with gold leaves, to hang down over the forehead;
at the end of these chains there hangs a double leaf about ¾ of an
inch long.

The fillet ἄμπυξ is above 18 inches long and 2/5 of an inch broad, and
has three perforations at each end. Eight quadruple rows of dots divide
it into nine compartments, in each of which there are two large dots;
and an uninterrupted row of dots adorns the whole edge. Of the four
ear-rings only two are exactly alike. From the upper part, which is
almost in the shape of a basket, and is ornamented with two rows of
decorations in the form of beads, there hang six small chains on which
are three little cylinders; attached to the end of the chains are small
idols of the tutelar goddess of Troy. The length of each ear-ring is
3½ inches. The upper part of the other two ear-rings is larger and
thicker, but likewise almost in the shape of a basket, from it are
suspended five little chains entirely covered with small round leaves,
on which are likewise fastened small but more imposing idols of the
Ilian tutelar divinity; the length of one of these pendants is 3½
inches, that of the other a little over 3 inches.[294]

[Illustration:

PLATE XX.

No. 278.--Selection from the small Golden Jewels found in the Silver
Jug.

No. 279.--Golden Fillet (ἄμπυξ), above 18 inches long.

No. 280.--Four Golden Ear-rings, or Tassels (θύσανοι), each 3½ inches
long.

JEWELS OF GOLD.

THE TREASURE OF PRIAM.

_Page 336._
]

Of the six gold bracelets, two are quite simple and closed, and are
about 1/5 of an inch thick; a third is likewise closed, but consists of
an ornamented band 1/25 of an inch thick, and ¼ of an inch broad. The
other three are double, and the ends are turned round and furnished with
a head. The princesses who wore these bracelets must have had unusually
small hands, for they are so small that a girl of ten would have
difficulty in putting them on.

[Illustration: No. 281. Six golden Bracelets welded together by the
conflagration.--[TR.]]

The 56 other gold ear-rings are of various sizes, and three of them
appear to have also been used by the princesses of the royal family as
finger-rings.[295] Not one of the ear-rings has any resemblance in form
to the Hellenic, Roman, Egyptian, or Assyrian ear-rings; 20 of them end
in four leaves, ten in three leaves, lying beside one another and
soldered together, and they are thus extremely like those ear-rings of
gold and electrum which I found last year at a depth of 9 and 13 meters
(29½ and 42½ feet). Eighteen other ear-rings end in six leaves; at
the commencement of these there are two small studs, in the centre two
rows of five small studs each, and at the end three small studs. Two of
the largest rings, which, owing to the thickness of the one end,
certainly cannot have been used as ear-rings, and appear to have been
finger-rings only, terminate in four leaves, and at the commencement of
these there are two, in the middle three, and at the end again two small
studs. Of the remaining ear-rings two have the form of three, and four
the form of two, beautifully ornamented serpents lying beside one
another.

[Illustration: No. 282. THE TREASURE OF PRIAM.

4610 SMALL JEWELS OF GOLD.]

Besides the ear-rings, a great number of other ornaments strung on
threads, or fastened on leather, had been put into the same large silver
vase; for above and below them, as already said, I found 8750 small
objects;[296] such as gold rings, only 1/8 of an inch in diameter;
perforated dice, either smooth or in the form of little indented stars,
about 1/6 of an inch in diameter; gold perforated prisms 1/10 of an inch
high and 1/8 of an inch broad, decorated longitudinally with eight or
sixteen incisions; small leaves about 1/5 of an inch long, and 1/6 of an
inch broad, and pierced longitudinally with a hole for threading them;
small gold pegs 1/3 of an inch long, with a button on one side, and a
perforated hole on the other; perforated prisms about 1/5 of an inch
long and 1/10 of an inch broad; double or triple gold rings soldered
together and only ¼ of an inch in diameter, with holes on both sides
for threading them; gold buttons or studs 1/5 of an inch high, in the
cavity of which is a ring above 1/10 of an inch broad for sewing them
on; gold double buttons, exactly like our shirt studs, 3/10 of an inch
long, which, however, are not soldered, but simply stuck together, for
from the cavity of the one button there projects a tube (αὐλίσκος)
nearly ¼ of an inch long, and from the other a pin (ἔμβολον) of the
same length, and the pin is merely stuck into the tube to form the
double stud. These double buttons or studs can only have been used,
probably, as ornament upon leather articles, for instance upon the
handle-straps (τελαμῶνες) of swords, shields, or knives. I found in the
vase also two gold cylinders above 1/10 of an inch thick and ¾ of an
inch long; also a small gold peg above 4/5 of an inch in length, and
from 6/100 to 8/100 of an inch thick; it has at one end a perforated
hole for hanging it up, and on the other side six encircling incisions,
which give the article the appearance of a screw; it is only by means of
a magnifying glass that it is found not to be really a screw. I also
found in the same vase two pieces of gold, one of which is 1/7 of an
inch, the other above 2 inches, long; each of them has 21
perforations.[297]

The person who endeavoured to save the Treasure had fortunately the
presence of mind to stand the silver vase, containing the valuable
articles described above, upright in the chest, so that not so much as a
bead could fall out, and everything has been preserved uninjured.

My esteemed friend M. Landerer, of Athens, a chemist well known through
his discoveries and writings, who has most carefully examined all the
copper articles of the Treasure, and analysed the fragments, finds that
all of them consist of pure copper without any admixture of tin or
zinc,[298] and that, in order to make them more durable, they have been
wrought with the hammer (σφυρήλατον).

       *       *       *       *       *

As I hoped to find other treasures here, and also wished to bring to
light the wall that surrounded Troy, the erection of which Homer[299]
ascribes to Poseidon and Apollo, as far as the Scæan Gate, I have
entirely cut away the upper wall, which rested partly upon the gate, to
an extent of 56 feet. Visitors to the Troad can, however, still see part
of it in the north-western earth-wall opposite the Scæan Gate. I have
also broken down the enormous block of earth which separated my western
and north-western cutting from the Great Tower; but in order to do this,
I had to pull down the larger one of my wooden houses, and I had also to
bridge over the Scæan Gate, so as to facilitate the removal of the
_débris_. The result of this new excavation is very important to
archæology; for I have been able to uncover several walls, and also a
room of the Royal Palace, 20 feet in length and breadth, upon which no
buildings of a later period rest.

[Illustration: No. 283. Terra-cotta Vessel in the shape of a Cask. From
the Palace (8 M.).]

Of the objects discovered there I have only to mention an excellently
engraved inscription found upon a square piece of red slate, which has
two holes not bored through it and an encircling incision, but neither
can my learned friend Émile Burnouf nor can I tell in what language the
inscription is written.[300] Further, there were some interesting
terra-cottas, among which is a vessel, quite the form of a modern cask,
and with a tube in the centre for pouring in and drawing off the
liquid. There were also found upon the wall of Troy, 1¾ feet below
the place where the Treasure was discovered, three silver dishes
(φιάλαι), two of which were broken to pieces in digging down the
_débris_; they can, however, be repaired, as I have all the pieces.[301]
These dishes seem to have belonged to the Treasure, and the fact of the
latter having otherwise escaped our pickaxes is due to the
above-mentioned large copper vessels which projected, so that I could
cut everything out of the hard _débris_ by means of a knife.

[Illustration: No. 284. Large Silver Vase found in the House of Priam (8
M.).]

I now perceive that the cutting which I made in April 1870 was exactly
at the proper point, and that if I had only continued it, I should in a
few weeks have uncovered the most remarkable buildings in Troy, namely,
the Palace of King Priam, the Scæan Gate, the Great Surrounding Wall,
and the Great Tower of Ilium; whereas, in consequence of abandoning this
cutting, I had to make colossal excavations from east to west and from
north to south through the entire hill in order to find those most
interesting buildings.

In the upper strata of the north-western and western excavations we came
upon another great quantity of heads of beautiful terra-cotta figures of
the best Hellenic period, and at a depth of 23 feet upon some idols, as
well as the upper portion of a vase with the owl’s face and a lid in the
form of a helmet. Lids of this kind, upon the edge of which female hair
is indicated by incisions, are frequently found in all the strata
between 4 and 10 meters (13 and 33 feet) deep, and as they belong to
vases with owls’ faces, the number of lids gives us an idea of the
number of the vases with the figure of the owl-headed Athena, which
existed here in Troy.

But Troy was not large. I have altogether made twenty borings down to
the rock, on the west, south-west, south, south-east and east of the
Pergamus, directly at its foot or at some distance from it, on the
plateau of the Ilium of the Greek colony. As I find in these borings no
trace either of fragments of Trojan pottery or of Trojan house-walls,
and nothing but fragments of Hellenic pottery and Hellenic house-walls,
and as, moreover, the hill of the Pergamus has a very steep slope
towards the north, the north-east, and the north-west, facing the
Hellespont, and is also very steep towards the Plain, the city could not
possibly have extended in any one of these directions. I now most
emphatically declare that the city of Priam cannot have extended on any
one side beyond the primeval plateau of this fortress, the
circumference of which is indicated to the south and south-west by the
Great Tower and the Scæan Gate, and to the north-west, north-east and
east by the surrounding wall of Troy. The city was so strongly fortified
by nature on the north side, that the wall there consisted only of those
large blocks of stone, loosely piled one upon another in the form of a
wall, which last year gave me such immense trouble to remove. This wall
can be recognized at once, immediately to the right in the northern
entrance of my large cutting, which runs through the entire hill.

I am extremely disappointed at being obliged to give so small a plan of
Troy; nay, I had wished to be able to make it a thousand times larger,
but I value truth above everything, and I rejoice that my three years’
excavations have laid open the Homeric Troy, even though on a diminished
scale, and that I have proved the Iliad to be based upon real facts.

Homer is an epic poet, and not an historian: so it is quite natural that
he should have exaggerated everything with poetic licence. Moreover, the
events which he describes are so marvellous, that many scholars have
long doubted the very existence of Troy, and have considered the city to
be a mere invention of the poet’s fancy. I venture to hope that the
civilized world will not only not be disappointed that the city of Priam
has shown itself to be scarcely a twentieth part as large as was to be
expected from the statements of the Iliad, but that, on the contrary, it
will accept with delight and enthusiasm the certainty that Ilium did
really exist, that a large portion of it has now been brought to light,
and that Homer, even although he exaggerates, nevertheless sings of
events that actually happened. Besides, it ought to be remembered that
the area of Troy, now reduced to this small hill, is still as large as,
or even larger than, the royal city of Athens, which was confined to the
Acropolis, and did not extend beyond it, till the time when Theseus
added the twelve villages, and the city was consequently named in the
plural Ἀθῆναι. It is very likely that the same happened to the town of
Mycenæ (Μυκῆναι), which Homer describes as being rich in gold, and which
is also spoken of in the singular,εὐρυάγυια Μυκήνη.[302]

But this little Troy was immensely rich for the circumstances of those
times, since I find here a treasure of gold and silver articles, such as
is now scarcely to be found in an emperor’s palace; and as the town was
wealthy, so was it also powerful, and ruled over a large territory.

The houses of Troy were all very high and had several storeys, as is
obvious from the thickness of the walls and the colossal heaps of
_débris_. But even if we assume the houses to have been of three
storeys, and standing close by the side of one another, the town can
nevertheless not have contained more than 5000 inhabitants, and cannot
have mustered more than 500 soldiers; but it could always raise a
considerable army from among its subjects, and as it was rich and
powerful, it could obtain mercenaries from all quarters.

As I do not find in my shafts (that is, beyond the hill itself) a trace
of earthenware belonging to the successors of the Trojans up to the time
of the Greek colony, it may with certainty be assumed that Troy had
increased in size at Homer’s time only to the small amount of what was
added through the heaps of rubbish caused by the destruction of the
city. Homer can _never_ have seen Ilium’s Great Tower, the surrounding
wall of Poseidon and Apollo, the Scæan Gate or the Palace of King Priam,
for all these monuments lay buried deep in heaps of rubbish, and he made
no excavations to bring them to light. He knew of these monuments of
immortal fame only from hearsay, for the tragic fate of ancient Troy
was then still in fresh remembrance, and had already been for centuries
in the mouth of all minstrels.[303]

Homer rarely mentions temples, and, although he speaks of the temple of
Athena, yet, considering the smallness of the city, it is very doubtful
whether it actually existed. It is probable that the tutelar goddess at
that time possessed only the sacrificial altar which I discovered, and
the crescent form of which greatly resembles the upper portion of the
ivory idol found in the lowest strata,[304] as well as the one end of
the six talents contained among the Treasure.

The position, size, and depth of all my shafts will be found most
accurately specified on my plan of the Ilium of the Greek colony;[305] I
therefore refrain from repeating these statements here, so as not to
weary the reader. I also add an accurate plan of my excavations,[306] a
plan of the Scæan Gate and of the Great Tower of Ilium,[307] and lastly,
a plan of the city of Troy at the time of the great destruction (Plan
IV.).

[Illustration: Plan IV.--Plan of Troy at the Epoch of Priam, according
to Dr. Schliemann’s Excavations.]

The Scæan Gate gives us the age of the royal edifice in front of which
it stands, and of the vessels of pottery which are found in that house.
This earthenware is indeed better than what is generally found here at a
depth of from 7 to 10 meters (23 to 33 feet), but it is exactly similar;
and consequently all the strata of _débris_ from these depths belong to
the Trojan people. These strata are composed of red, yellow, and
occasionally black wood-ashes, and every stone found there bears the
marks of the fearful heat to which it has been exposed. In these strata
we never meet with those brilliant black plates and dishes, with a long
horizontal ring on either side, found at the depth of from 13 to 16
meters (42½ to 52½ feet), nor do we meet with the vases with two
long tubes on either side. Besides the vessels in the lowest strata are
entirely different in quality and in form from those found at a depth of
from 23 to 33 feet, so that they certainly cannot have belonged to the
same people. But they belong, at all events, to a kindred Aryan nation,
as these too possessed in common with the Trojans the whorls ornamented
with Aryan religious symbols, and also idols of the Ilian Athena. I
formerly believed that the most ancient people who inhabited this site
were the Trojans, because I fancied that among their ruins I had found
the δέπας ἀμφικύπελλον, but I now perceive that Priam’s people were the
succeeding nation, because in their ruins I have discovered the actual
δέπας ἀμφικύπελλον, made of gold and also of terra-cotta, and likewise
the Scæan Gate.

Several geologists, who have visited me here, maintain that the stratum
of scoriæ, which runs through the greater part of the hill, at an
average depth of 9 meters (29½ feet), has been formed by melted lead
and copper ore, quantities of which must have existed here at the time
of the destruction of Troy; and this opinion is also shared by the
engineer, Adolphe Laurent, who has returned to help me with my last
works, and to make some new plans.

Strabo says,[308] “No trace of the ancient city (Troy) has been
preserved. This is very natural; for, as all the towns round about were
desolated, yet not completely destroyed, while Troy was razed to the
ground, so all the stones were carried off to renovate the others. Thus,
at least, Archæanax of Mitylene is said to have built a wall round
Sigeum with the stones.” These statements of Strabo are, however,
completely erroneous, and the tradition of antiquity, that Troy was
razed to the ground, can only be explained by its having been buried
deep beneath colossal masses of wood-ashes and stone, which were built
over by a new town; the latter being again destroyed, and again
surmounted by buildings which had a similar fate; till at last the mass
of _débris_ lying upon Troy reached a height of from 6 to 8 meters (20
to 26 feet), and upon this was established the Acropolis of the Ilium of
the Greek colony.

In consequence of my former mistaken idea, that Troy was to be found on
the primary soil or close above it, I unfortunately, in 1871 and 1872,
destroyed a large portion of the city, for I at that time broke down all
the house-walls in the higher strata which obstructed my way. This year,
however, as soon as I had come by clear proofs to the firm conviction
that Troy was not to be found upon the primary soil, but at a depth of
from 23 to 33 feet, I ceased to break down any house-wall in these
strata, so that in my excavations of this year a number of Trojan houses
have been brought to light. They will still stand for centuries, and
visitors to the Troad may convince themselves that the stones of the
Trojan buildings can _never_ have been used for building other towns,
for the greater part of them are still _in situ_. Moreover, they are
small, and millions of such stones are to be found upon all the fields
of this district.

Valuable stones, such as those large flags which cover the road leading
from the Scæan Gate to the Plain, as well as the stones of the enclosing
wall and of the Great Tower, have been left untouched, and not a single
stone of the Scæan Gate is wanting. Nay, with the exception of the
houses which I myself destroyed, it would be quite possible to uncover
the “carcasses” of all the houses, as in the case of Pompeii. The
houses, as I have already said, must have been very high, and a great
deal of wood must have been used in their construction, for otherwise
the conflagration could not have produced such an enormous quantity of
ashes and rubbish.

In my excavations of 1871 and 1872, at a depth of from 7 to 10 meters
(23 to 33 feet), I found only house-walls composed of sun-dried bricks;
and, as anyone may convince himself by examining the houses which I have
uncovered, this style of building was almost exclusively met with during
that year. It is only the buildings by the side of the Scæan Gate, and a
few houses in the depths of the Temple of Athena, that are made of
stones and earth.

[Illustration: No. 285. Splendid Terra-cotta Vase from the Palace of
Priam. This is the largest vase of the type frequent in the ruins, with
two small handles and two great upright wings. The _cover_ was found
near it.]

As may be seen from my plan of the site of Troy, I have excavated
two-thirds of the entire city; and, as I have brought to light the Great
Tower, the Scæan Gate, the city wall of Troy, the royal palace, the
sacrificial altar of the Ilian Athena, and so forth, I have uncovered
the grandest buildings, and, in fact, the best part of the city. I have
also made an exceedingly copious collection of all the articles of the
domestic life and the religion of the Trojans; and therefore it is not
to be expected that science would gain anything more by further
excavations. If, however, my excavations should at any time be
continued, I urgently entreat those who do so to throw the _débris_ of
their diggings from the declivity of the hill, and _not_ to fill up the
colossal cuttings which I have made with such infinite trouble and at
such great expense, for they are of great value to archæology, inasmuch
as in these cuttings all the strata of _débris_, from the primary soil
up to the surface of the hill, can be examined with little trouble.

On the north side of the hill, I have now also uncovered several
house-walls at a depth of 13 meters (42½ feet), and also the
beginning of that remarkable wall of fortification already mentioned,
the continuation of which may be seen in the labyrinth of house-walls in
the depths of the Temple of Athena. On the north side, above the primary
soil, I have also brought to light a portion of the pavement already
mentioned, composed of small, round white sea-pebbles, below which are
the calcined ruins of a building which formerly stood there.

[Illustration: No. 286. Curious double-necked Jug (8 M.).]

[Illustration: No. 287. Terra-cotta Vessel consisting of three Goblets
rising out of a tube on three feet (4 M.).--[6 M. in Atlas.]]

[Illustration: No. 288. Terra-cotta Vessel in the form of a Pig, with
legs too short to stand it on (7 M.).]

[Illustration: No. 289. A round Terra-cotta, stamped with Hieroglyphics
(1½ M.).]

Among some very remarkable terra-cottas discovered since my last report,
I must mention two jugs found on the north side, at a depth of from 23
to 26 feet, each of which has two upright necks standing side by side,
but their handles are united. One of them has also beside the mouths two
small elevations, which may probably indicate eyes. Of a third jug of
this kind, I only found the upper portion. I must also mention an
exceedingly curious cup, discovered at a depth of 4 meters (13 feet),
which consists of a tube resting upon three feet and ending in one large
and two small goblets; the larger goblet is connected with the opposite
side of the tube by a handle. At the same depth I met with a large vase,
from which projects a separate small vase; it is ornamented with
incisions, and has three feet and two very pretty handles and rings for
hanging it up. I found likewise, at the depth of 13 feet, a vase with
two female breasts, two large handles and engravings resembling letters.
Among other extremely curious terra-cottas, I must also mention three
pots with three rows of perforations; they have the usual handle on one
side and three feet on the other; also three large vases with
perforations right round, on all sides from the bottom to the top; their
use is a riddle to me; can they have served as bee-hives?[309] Also a
vessel in the form of a pig with four feet, which are, however, shorter
than the belly, so that the vessel cannot stand upon them; the neck of
the vessel, which is attached to the back of the pig, is connected with
the hinder part by a handle. I further found a pot in the form of a
basket with a handle crossing the mouth, and with a tube in the bulge
for drawing off the liquid. Also two terra-cotta funnels, at a depth of
10 feet, with a letter, which I have repeatedly met with on some of the
terra-cottas of which I have given drawings, and which therefore will
probably be deciphered. At a depth of 5 feet I found one of those round
twice-perforated terra-cottas with a stamp, in which there are Egyptian
hieroglyphics; also a dozen of the same articles in the stamps of which
are a crowned head, a bird, a dog’s head, a flying man or an eagle and a
stag. At a depth of 16½ feet, I found the handle of a cup with the
beautifully modelled head of a bull, which probably represents the
βοῶπις πότνια Ἥρη:[310] however, this cannot be proved, for up to that
time I had never found an idol with the head of an ox. Neither can I
prove that the terra-cottas here frequently met with, in the form of
horses’ heads, represent the mother of Hera, Cybele or Rhea; but it is
very likely, for, as is well known, in Phrygia she was represented with
a horse’s head. Terra-cotta idols of the Ilian Athena are rarely met
with; but we daily find marble idols of this goddess, most of which have
almost a human form. We also frequently come upon oblong flat pieces of
rough marble, upon which the owl’s face of the goddess is more or less
deeply engraved. It is often so finely scratched that the aid of a
magnifying glass is required to convince one that it actually exists; we
found several such pieces of marble where the owl’s head was painted in
a black colour. Since I have come to the conclusion that they are idols
of the tutelary divinity of Troy, I have carefully collected them; but
in 1871 and 1872 seven-eighths of all the marble idols must have escaped
my notice, for at that time I had no idea of their significance.

[Illustration: No. 290. Fragment of a Terra-cotta Vessel, in the shape
of a Horse’s Head (4 M.).]

In excavating the ground upon which my wooden house had stood, we found,
at a depth of from 9 to 19 inches, eighteen copper and two silver
medals; one of the latter is of Marcus Aurelius. The other is a
tetradrachm of the island of Tenedos; on the obverse, to the right, is
the head of Jupiter, to the left that of Juno, both having one neck in
common, like the heads of Janus. The head of Jupiter is crowned with
laurels, that of Juno has a wreath or crown. Upon the reverse of the
coin there is a laurel wreath round the edge, and in the centre a large
double axe, above which stands the word ΤΕΝΕΔΙΩΝ: below and to the right
of the handle of the double axe there is a winged Eros, who is holding
up an object which it is difficult to distinguish; to the left is a
bunch of grapes and a monogram, which looks like the letter Α.

Of the copper coins, five are of Alexandria Troas, two of Ophrynium, one
of Tenedos, two of Abydos, and one of Dardania. Two have on one side the
bust of Julia Domna, with the inscription ΟΥΛΙΑ ΣΕΒΑΣΤΗ; one of these
has on the reverse the full-length figure of this empress with the
inscription ΙΛΙΕΩΝ, and the other has the figure of Hector with the
inscription ΙΛΙΕΩΝ ϶ΚΤΩΡ. The other medals belong to an earlier period
of Ilium, and have on the one side the bust of Athena, and on the other
the inscription ΙΛΙΕΩΝ.

In April of this year, when I uncovered the road paved with large flags
of stone, which leads from the Scæan Gate to the Plain, the stones
looked as new as if they had just been hewn. But since then, under the
influence of the burning sun, the flags of the upper portion of the
road, which have specially suffered from the conflagration that
destroyed the city, are rapidly crumbling away, and will probably have
quite disappeared in a few years. However, the flags of stone on the
north-western half of the road which have been less exposed to the heat,
may still last many centuries.

The following inscriptions were found at a depth of from 19 inches to
3½ feet below my wooden house.

          ...........................................
    ...........................................
    ......ΣΑ....................................
    ...ΕΣΑΙ..............ΝΟΥ.................
    ......ΑΒΟΥΚΟΛ......ΕΤΡΑΝΦ...........                            5
    ....ΣΚΑΤΑΠΛΗΘΟΣΕΙΣΟΙΝΙΣΤΡΑ.....
    ..ΤΩΝΕΨΗΦΙΣΘΑΙΣΚΑΔΡΕΙΣΟ.....
    ..ΣΑΝΔΡΑΣΤΟΥΣΣΥΝΘΗΣΟΜΕΝ.....
    ....ΕΡΟΝΥΠΗΡΧΕΝΚΑΙΣΤΗΛΩ.....
    ....ΙΕΝΤΩΤΩΝΣΑΜΟΘΡΑΚ.........                                  10
    ....ΙΣΑΠΟΚΑΘΙΣΤΑΜΕΝΟ..........
    ....ΕΝΟΥΣΤΗΝΣΥΝΘΕΣΙΝ..........
    ......ΜΟΛΟΓΙΑΣΤΟΑΝΤΙΓΡΑ..........
    ......ΟΙΚΗΣΟΝΤΕΣΗΡΕΘΗΣ............
    ......ΟΠΕΙΘΟΥΜΙΛΗΣΙΟΣ..............                             15
    ......ΘΟΥΔΙΟΠΕΙΔΗΣΒ..................
    ..... ΤΙΦΑΝΗΣΑΠ.......................

          ..............................
    ......σα......................
    ....εσαι...............νου(ς...
    ........αβουκολ......ετραν φ...                                  5
    ....ς κατὰ πλῆθος εἰς οἴνιστρα.....
    ..των ἐψηφίσθαι Σκαδρεῖς ο.......
    ..ς ἀνδρὰς τοὺς συνθησομέν(ους....
    ....ερον ὑπῆρχεν καὶ στηλω......
    ....ι ἐν τῷ τῶν Σαμοθράκ(ων......                                10
    ....ις ἀποκαθισταμέν(ο..........
    ....ενους τὴν σύνθεσιν...........
    ......ὁ)μολογίας τὸ ἀντίγρα(φον...
    ......οἰκήσοντες ᾑρέθησ(αν......
    ......Δι)οπείθου Μιλήσιος.......                                 15
    ......θου Διοπείδης Β...........
    ......Αν)τιφάνης Ἀπ...........

This inscription contains a contract for a settlement and gives the
names of the men selected for founding it; Σκαδρεῖς is an unknown word,
which has never before been met with.

                \ΧΝ
       ΩΣΧΙΛΙΑΣ
     ΩΣΤΗΣΔΟΘΕΙΣΗΣ
  ΕΙΠΕΝΤΕΚΑΙΟΥΕΛΑΒΟ
  ΒΑΛΛΟΝΤΩΙΕΝΙΑΥΤΩ                                                 5
  ΤΗΝΣΥΝΕΔΡΕΙΑΝΟΥΚΑ
  ΤΗΣΒΟΟΣΤΗΝΤΙΜΗΝΥ
  ΤΩΓΚΡΕΩΝΤΑΣΛΟΙΠΑ
  ΤΡΩΒΟΛΟΝΤΗΝΠΟΛΙΝΤΗΜ
  ΚΑΣΑΝΤΟΥΣΤΟΚΟΥΣΤΟΥΣ                                             10
  ΚΟΣΙΑΣΤΕΣΣΑΡΑΚΟΝΤΑΠΕ
  ΘΕΤΟΣΔΙΑΚΟΣΙΑΣΤΕΣΣΑ
  ΚΑΙΟΤΙΤΗΝΣΥΝΕΔΡΕΙΑ
  ΤΕΙΛΑΝΠΕΝΤΑΚΟΣΙΑΣΚΑΙΤΗ
  ΡΗΜΕΝΗΣΤΗΣΤΙΜΗΣΤΩΓΚΡΕ                                           15
  ΤΑΔΥΟ

             ........ως χιλίας..............
  ......ε)ως τῆς δοθείσης..........
  .....ει πέντε καὶ οὗ ἐλαβο........
  ....το ἐπι)βάλλον τῶι ἐνιαυτῶ(ι....                                  5
  ....τὴν συνέδρειαν οὐ κα.........
  ....τῆς βοὸς τὴν τιμὴν ὑ.........
  ....τῶγ κρεῶν τὰς λοιπὰ(ς.......
  ....τε) τρώβολον τὴν πόλιν τημ...
  ....ἠνάγ;)κασαν τοὺς τόκους τοὺς..                                   10
  ....α)κοσίας τεσσαράκοντα πέ(ντε.
  ....θετος διακοσίας τεσσα(ρα.....
  ...καὶ ὅτι τὴν συνέδρεια(ν........
  ...ἀπέσ)τειλαν πεντακοσίας καὶ τη.
  ...ρημένης τῆς τιμῆς τῶγ κρε(ῶν...                                  15
  ...τάλαν;)τα δύο................

In this day closing the excavations at Ilium for ever, I cannot but
fervently thank God for His great mercy, in that, notwithstanding the
terrible danger to which we have been exposed owing to the continual
hurricanes, during the last three years’ gigantic excavations, no
misfortune has happened, no one has been killed, and no one has even
been seriously hurt.

       *       *       *       *       *

In conclusion, I cannot refrain from most strongly recommending Nikolaos
Saphyros Jannakis, of the neighbouring village of Renkoï, to all those
who, sooner or later, may wish to make excavations in the Plain of Troy
or in the neighbourhood. During all my excavations here, since April
1870, he has been my attendant, cook, and cashier. It is in the latter
capacity especially that I find him incomparably useful on account of
his honesty, which has been well tested, and also on account of his
knowing the names and capabilities of every workman in the Troad. In
addition to this, his size and herculean strength, his cleverness, and
his thorough knowledge of the Turkish language, are excellently adapted
for settling the difficulties which continually arise in reference to
the excavations with the Turkish officials. I must also specially
recommend my foreman Spiridion Demetrios of Athens, and Captain Georgios
Tsirogiannis of Limme in Eubœa, for they have here learnt by long
experience the easiest way of removing colossal masses of _débris_, and
they have in addition the gift of command. I can also most strongly
recommend my accomplished draughtsman, Polychronios Lempessis, of
Salamis, who has here made all the drawings of my work from Plate 119 to
190.[311] Lastly, I can speak with the utmost satisfaction of my
engineer Adolphe Laurent, who has made the ground plans for me from
first to last.




NOTE A.

THE RIVER SIMOÏS.


As the present name of the Simoïs, _Dumbrek_, is not a Turkish word,
some take it for a corruption of the name Thymbrius, and use it to prove
that the river--which, flowing past the foot of the ruins of Ophrynium,
runs through the north-eastern valley of the Plain of Troy, and falls
into the Kalifatli Asmak, the very ancient bed of the Scamander, in
front of Ilium--is the Thymbrius, and cannot possibly be the Simoïs.

To this I reply: that there is no example of a Greek word ending in _os_
being rendered in Turkish by a word ending in a _k_; further that
Dumbrek must certainly be a corruption of the two Turkish words طوك برق
_Don barek_. _Don_ signifies ‘ice,’ and _barek_ the ‘possession’ or the
‘habitation'; the two words therefore mean much the same thing as
containing ice, and the name might be explained by the fact that the
inundations caused by the Simoïs are frequently frozen over in winter,
when the whole north-eastern plain forms a sheet of ice. Throughout
antiquity, however, the river was called the Simoïs, for according to
Strabo (XIII. 1. p. 103), the grove dedicated to Hector was situated on
a hill near Ophrynium; according to Lycophron (_Cassandra_), the hero
was buried in Ophrynium; and according to Virgil,[312] who is the most
conscientious preserver of ancient traditions, Hector’s tomb was
situated in a little grove on the shores of the Simoïs.




NOTE B.


I.--List of the specific weight in Grammes, of the terra-cottas in the
form of cylinders, balls, pyramids, &c., found in the various depths of
the Pergamus of Troy, and which appear to have been used as
weights.[313] (The depths are given in meters.)

  +----+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
  |  1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7 | 8 | 9 | 10| 11| 12| 13| 14| 15|
  +----+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
  |  67| 98| 73| 58|107|177| 95| 70| 38| 26|   |   |210|   |   |
  | 125|149|202|298|110|221|198| 74| 75| 42|   |   |   |   |   |
  | 134|162|205|   |120|259|215| 90| 83|144|   |   |   |   |   |
  | 430|197|328|   |   |400|334| 91|154|148|   |   |   |   |   |
  | 545|220|   |   |   |400|   |109| 73|167|   |   |   |   |   |
  |1005|228|   |   |   |442|   |112|   |176|   |   |   |   |   |
  |    |306|   |   |   |443|   |133|   |224|   |   |   |   |   |
  |    |495|   |   |   |448|   |141|   |248|   |   |   |   |   |
  |    |509|   |   |   |455|   |177|   |279|   |   |   |   |   |
  |    |   |   |   |   |456|   |403|   |300|   |   |   |   |   |
  |    |   |   |   |   |458|   |458|   |300|   |   |   |   |   |
  |    |   |   |   |   |458|   |472|   |308|   |   |   |   |   |
  |    |   |   |   |   |464|   |748|   |315|   |   |   |   |   |
  |    |   |   |   |   |465|   |   |   |320|   |   |   |   |   |
  |    |   |   |   |   |470|   |   |   |322|   |   |   |   |   |
  |    |   |   |   |   |475|   |   |   |336|   |   |   |   |   |
  |    |   |   |   |   |475|   |   |   |338|   |   |   |   |   |
  |    |   |   |   |   |555|   |   |   |350|   |   |   |   |   |
  |    |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |355|   |   |   |   |   |
  |    |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |365|   |   |   |   |   |
  |    |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |366|   |   |   |   |   |
  |    |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |368|   |   |   |   |   |
  |    |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |374|   |   |   |   |   |
  |    |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |384|   |   |   |   |   |
  |    |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |430|   |   |   |   |   |
  |    |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |435|   |   |   |   |   |
  |    |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |450|   |   |   |   |   |
  |    |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |458|   |   |   |   |   |
  |    |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |500|   |   |   |   |   |
  |    |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |520|   |   |   |   |   |
  |    |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |575|   |   |   |   |   |


II. List of the specific weight in Grammes of the round stones found in
the various depths of the Pergamus of Troy, and which have apparently
served as weights. (The depths are in meters.)

  +---+---+---+---+----+----+----+----+---+---+---+----+----+----+----+
  | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 |  5 |  6 |  7 |  8 | 9 | 10| 11| 12 | 13 | 14 | 15 |
  +---+---+---+---+----+----+----+----+---+---+---+----+----+----+----+
  |418|183| 79| 69| 100| 100| 169| 102|223|145|555| 485| 190| 135| 332|
  |576|275|109| 71| 112| 185| 186| 150|224|146|   |1710| 468| 413| 363|
  |757|442|135|100| 140| 300| 186| 207|227|182|   |    |1475| 450| 447|
  |   |472|414|136| 215| 330| 189| 244|372|190|   |    |    | 485| 475|
  |   |   |448|195| 230| 412| 219| 254|390|214|   |    |    | 505| 557|
  |   |   |584|388| 262| 420| 229| 257|420|225|   |    |    |1250| 585|
  |   |   |726|400| 268| 427| 245| 288|500|280|   |    |    |1852| 680|
  |   |   |   |513| 293| 446| 266| 295|852|310|   |    |    |    |3148|
  |   |   |   |583| 318| 460| 290| 381|   |334|   |    |    |    |    |
  |   |   |   |608| 335| 462| 291| 385|   |341|   |    |    |    |    |
  |   |   |   |624| 335| 515| 346| 402|   |372|   |    |    |    |    |
  |   |   |   |635| 368| 528| 369| 402|   |450|   |    |    |    |    |
  |   |   |   |662| 478| 546| 380| 408|   |545|   |    |    |    |    |
  |   |   |   |688| 490| 572| 384| 429|   |605|   |    |    |    |    |
  |   |   |   |893| 498| 602| 400| 440|   |627|   |    |    |    |    |
  |   |   |   |   | 537| 628| 435| 472|   |755|   |    |    |    |    |
  |   |   |   |   | 637| 640| 437| 536|   |   |   |    |    |    |    |
  |   |   |   |   | 688| 670| 468| 551|   |   |   |    |    |    |    |
  |   |   |   |   | 728| 738| 483| 568|   |   |   |    |    |    |    |
  |   |   |   |   | 757| 770| 491| 620|   |   |   |    |    |    |    |
  |   |   |   |   | 790|1288| 515| 638|   |   |   |    |    |    |    |
  |   |   |   |   |4260|3000| 534| 658|   |   |   |    |    |    |    |
  |   |   |   |   |    |    | 560| 660|   |   |   |    |    |    |    |
  |   |   |   |   |    |    | 569| 712|   |   |   |    |    |    |    |
  |   |   |   |   |    |    | 606| 764|   |   |   |    |    |    |    |
  |   |   |   |   |    |    | 632| 825|   |   |   |    |    |    |    |
  |   |   |   |   |    |    | 825|1145|   |   |   |    |    |    |    |
  |   |   |   |   |    |    | 895|1160|   |   |   |    |    |    |    |
  |   |   |   |   |    |    | 904|1232|   |   |   |    |    |    |    |
  |   |   |   |   |    |    |1005|1710|   |   |   |    |    |    |    |
  |   |   |   |   |    |    |1082|1950|   |   |   |    |    |    |    |
  |   |   |   |   |    |    |1193|    |   |   |   |    |    |    |    |
  |   |   |   |   |    |    |1877|    |   |   |   |    |    |    |    |




NOTE C.


Monsieur Ernest Chantre, Assistant Director of the Museum in Lyon, has
just sent me the result of the analysis of the Trojan weapons made by
the celebrated chemist, M. Damour, of Lyon. I had drilled three weapons,
and sent him the drillings.


No. 1.--Drillings from one of the battle-axes of the treasure.

_Analysis._


                                     Grammes.
                                      0·3020
  Deducting the sand contained in it  0·0160
                                      ------
  Analysed metal                      0·2860
                                      ------

                                             In 10·000 parts.
                                     Grammes.
  This consists of copper             0·2740   = 0·9580
    “     “        tin                0·0110   = 0·0384
                                      ------     ------
                                      0·2850   = 0·9964
                                      ------     ------


No. 2.--Drillings of another battle-axe of the treasure.

_Analysis._

                                     Grammes.
                                      0·2970
  Deducting the sand contained in it  0·0020
                                      ------
  Analysed metal                      0·2950
                                             In 10·000 parts.
                                     Grammes.
  This consists of copper             0·2675 = 0·9067
   “      “        tin                0·0255 = 0·0864
                                      ------   ------
                                      0·2930 = 0·9931
                                      ------   ------


     No. 3.--Drillings from a common two-edged axe, found at a depth of
     3¼ feet, and therefore in the remains of the Greek colony.

_Analysis._

                                       Grammes.
                                        0·5280
  Deducting the sand contained in it    0·0070
                                        ------
  Analysed metal                        0·5210
                                        ------

                                      In 10·000 parts.
                             Grammes.
  This consists of copper     0·4810 = 0·9232
    “       “      tin        0·0385 = 0·0739
                              ------   ------
                              0·5195 = 0·9971
                              ------   ------


     NO. 4.--Drillings of one of the Trojan sling-bullets, externally
     covered with verdigris, and internally the colour of iron.

_Analysis._

                             Grammes.
  Quantity of analysed metal  0·2410
                              ------

                                     In 10·000 parts.
  Consisting of sulphur       0·0470 = 0·1950
      “     “   copper        0·1920 = 0·7966
      “     “   iron          0·0002 = 0·0008
      “     “   quartzose     0·0005 = 0·0020
                              ------   ------
                              0·2397 = 0·9944
                              ------   ------

DR. H. SCHLIEMANN.

_Athens, January 1, 1874._

[Illustration: No. 291. An Inscribed Trojan Whorl (8 M.).]




APPENDIX.

ON THE INSCRIPTIONS FOUND AT HISSARLIK.

BY THE EDITOR.


As soon as Dr. Schliemann’s wonderful discoveries at Hissarlik were made
known, one of the most important questions that arose in the mind of all
scholars was:--Has he found any _Inscriptions_, to throw the certain
light of written testimony on the language and ethnic affinities, the
history and social condition, the religion, science, and literature, of
the old inhabitants of the hill, whose records form as yet no part of
ancient history?

Dr. Schliemann’s private communications during the progress of his work
had called forth the efforts of eminent Orientalists--such as Martin
Haug, Émile Burnouf, and Max Müller--to attempt the discovery of true
writing among the vast variety of strange and novel patterns impressed
upon the terra-cotta whorls, balls, seals, vases, and other objects in
his collection; for some of these bore a likeness to written characters
which could hardly be deceptive.[314] It mattered not for this enquiry,
by what name the habitations, whose successive strata were revealed,
had been called of old. No one whose opinion was worth regarding
disputed their very high antiquity, which implied the great age of the
objects found. Apart even from its traditional claim to be the Ilium of
Homer, the site lay in the track of the primitive migrations of the
Indo-European race from their cradle in the East to their settlements in
the West; and not of one migration only, but of their passage to and fro
between the shores of Asia and of Europe; as well as upon the path of
their commerce and military expeditions, after they were settled in
their homes. For, lest we be misled by the arbitrary distinction between
the continents, which is stereotyped in the names of Asia and
Europe--that is, East and West--it must be borne in mind that the
Hellespont and Bosporus (as the latter name expresses) were _ferries_
rather than sundering seas, and the islands of the Ægean were
stepping-stones. The close affinities of the early settlers on both
shores had long since been proved; and, in particular, the presence of
the great Pelasgo-Hellenic or Græco-Italic family had been traced on
both. The very ancient habitation of the north-western parts of Asia
Minor by the _Ionians_--the oriental name of the whole Hellenic
race--long before their traditional colonization from the peninsula of
Hellas--had been maintained by Ernst Curtius twenty years ago,[315] and
more fully established by recent Egyptologers[316]--thus confirming the
most ancient ethnic record, that the _Isles of the Gentiles_ were
divided among the families of the _Sons of Javan_.[317] Thus, before
the first trench was dug at Hissarlik, a clue was already supplied to
the race of the primitive inhabitants, if any such had dwelt there, and
to the nature of their language, if they had left any written records.

Among the patterns engraved upon the whorls and other terra-cottas, many
were soon found, as Dr. Schliemann has fully shown, to be the most
ancient sacred emblems of the Aryan race; and the discovery of these at
all depths, below the ruins of Greek Ilium, attested the common Aryan
descent of all the nations that had dwelt successively on the hill
before the historic Grecian colony. The absence of any trace of Egyptian
influence, and almost equally of Assyrian, seemed to attest an
independent and very ancient Aryan civilization; while the general
character of the works in terra-cotta, resembling those found in Cyprus
and some of the islands of the Ægean, appeared to belong to the style
which Professor Conze, of Vienna, had defined as the earliest Greek or
European Indo-Germanic. The characters, which looked so exactly like
writing, were certainly not hieroglyphs in any of their varieties;
nor--though there were some cuneiform marks--was there any true
cuneiform writing; while the few semblances of Phœnician characters were
soon found to be deceptive. This last fact, again, helped to carry back
the time of the settlement of Hissarlik beyond the age when Greeks and
Phœnicians had entered into close relations of civilization on the
shores of the Ægean, that is, before the date of the Homeric poems,
which are full of allusions to Phœnician influence.

It has often been observed how remarkably new discoveries coincide in
point of time, just when they are needed to throw light upon one
another. At the very moment when Dr. Schliemann was bringing to light
the remains buried in the Hill of Hissarlik, Orientalists were engaged
in deciphering the inscriptions found among the antiquities of Cyprus,
and upon the rock tablets in the island, by the aid of the still recent
results of cuneiform interpretation. The Cyprian characters were proved
to belong to a syllabic alphabet, which is a varied form of the
cuneiform writing of Babylonia and Assyria, and of an origin older than
the Phœnician. The leaders in this work were Mr. George Smith and Dr.
Samuel Birch, who assigned a phonetic value to 33 characters of the
Cypriote syllabary; and it was followed up with especial zeal by the
lamented young scholar, Dr. Johannes Brandis, who determined (as was
thought) the remainder of the 60 signs. His unfinished posthumous _Essay
on the Decipherment of the Cyprian Inscriptions_ forms the landmark of
the state of enquiry in the year in which Dr. Schliemann finished his
excavations.[318]

To DR. MARTIN HAUG belongs the honour of first applying this key to the
decipherment of the Hissarlik inscriptions. He traced such striking
resemblances in some of the characters to those of the Cyprian alphabet,
as to make out a good _primâ facie_ case for their identity, and he
seemed to have succeeded in deciphering three words. Two of these were
formed by the six characters on a whorl from the Trojan stratum, which
were afterwards seen to be identical with those on another from the same
depth (7 meters), a repetition which seems to show the importance of the
inscription. Both had been specially noticed and discussed by Dr.
Schliemann on their discovery;[319] and they will be always memorable in
the history of this investigation. Haug read these characters _ta. i. o.
si. i. go._, which he interpreted as a dedication, θείῳ Σιγῷ, “to the
divine Sigo,” a deity whose name was found in Sigeum, the Scamander, and
even Sicyon; and he thought he traced the same name on two of
Schliemann’s small funnels (Nos. 145, 146, p. 191).[320] But the deity
was otherwise as unknown as the transmutation of _ta. i. o._ into θείῳ
was forced; and, while Haug was doubtless right in his _method_, his
results must be pronounced at best:--

    “Fragments of broken words and thoughts,
          Yet glimpses of the true.”

[Illustration: Nos. 292, 293. Two Trojan Whorls from the same depth (7
M.) with an identical inscription.[321]]

It was with such a conviction that the enquiry was taken up by PROFESSOR
THEODORE GOMPERZ, of Vienna,[322] whose words are well worth quoting as
a lesson in the method of investigation: “One circumstance alone
appeared to me consoling, namely, that I did not find myself obliged to
add a new hypothesis to the numerous ones already existing, and that I
felt it still possible to abide by Haug’s discovery, were it only as a
starting-point for further efforts. _For the beginning of continuity in
enquiry is always the surest harbinger of approaching success._” After
making one correction in Haug’s reading of the above inscription, he
still found it quite unintelligible, till the thought struck him of
reading it from right to left round the whorl, instead of from left to
right, and the confused syllables flashed, as by a sudden
crystallization, into the pure Greek _ta. go. i. di. o. i._, that is
Ταγῷ δίῳ. “To the divine General or Prince,” an interpretation which
Professor Max Müller pronounced to be “almost beyond reasonable
doubt.”[323] We deem this solution worthy of special record, both as a
landmark in the history of the investigation, and still more as a
striking example of the power of mere coincidence to produce
combinations that seem to bear the stamp of truth.

[Illustration: No. 294. _ta. go. i. di. o. i._

No. 294. The above Inscription developed (7 M.).]

[Illustration: No. 295. Inscription on a Trojan Seal (7 M.).]

[Illustration: No. 296. Inscription on a Trojan Whetstone (7 M.).]

The other inscriptions, of which Professor Gomperz proposed solutions,
were the following: First, three letters on the terra-cotta seal, also
from the Trojan stratum, mentioned in the ‘Introduction’ (No. 4, p. 24;
Pl. 19, No. 555 in Schliemann’s Atlas), which Professor Max Müller was
at one time tempted to read as the very name of _Ilion_ (See the
‘Academy’ for May 16, 1874, p. 546). The second was the “splendidly
engraved inscription” round the base of the whetstone of red slate (No.
5, p. 24, Pl. 190, No. 3474, Atlas). The third is round the shoulder of
a vase from the Palace of Priam (No. 3, p. 23; Pl. 168, Nos. 3273 and
3278, Atlas), where, however, about one-third of the inscription is
wanting. The fourth is on a whorl from _the lower limit_ of the Trojan
stratum.

[Illustration: No. 297. Inscription on a Trojan Vase from the Palace (8
M.).]

[Illustration: No. 298. Trojan Whorl, with an Inscription (10 M.).]

[Illustration: No. 299. The Inscription developed (10 M.).
Comp. Pl. XXVII., No. 369. This also is of very coarse work.]

The above record of the process of the investigation will still possess
great historical interest, long after the results shall have emerged (as
we trust) from the cloud which, for the moment, has come over our hopes;
and we believe that its interest will be increased by stating the
present position of the case in the words of Professor Gomperz
himself[324]:--

     “There is not, and there cannot be, the slightest doubt that
     Professor Haug at Munich was perfectly right, when he first
     identified the symbols found on several of the Hissarlik vases,
     &c., with Cypriote characters. I was right too in following up the
     track, and I think still that I have scarcely once been wrong in
     identifying those symbols with these characters. Furthermore, my
     general inferences drawn from the fact, that the Cypriote syllabic
     writing occurs out of Cyprus, and associated with what I rightly
     have called _pre-Homeric_ objects of art, I still think
     unassailable. But--I cannot go further than this! My attempt at
     _deciphering_ those inscriptions I now look upon as abortive! I
     hasten to add, that I do not think I deserve any reproach in the
     matter. I utilized to the best of my abilities the progress which
     till then had been made in the decipherment of the Cypriote
     inscriptions found in Cyprus. I used as a key for my decipherment
     of the Hissarlik inscriptions the phonetic values which Mr. George
     Smith and Dr. Johannes Brandis had ascertained for those
     characters. But both these investigators had been only partially
     right! Wonderful indeed it is, that, applying as I did a key
     partially right and partially wrong, good and intelligible Greek
     words emerged. It was a most marvellous coincidence--but nothing
     else, a mere fortuitous coincidence.

     “The labour of ascertaining the phonetic value of the Cypriote
     characters has since been taken up by several German scholars, Dr.
     Moritz Schmidt, Professor at Jena, and Messrs. De[.e]ck[.e] and
     Siegismund at Strasburg, and to a candid critic there cannot remain
     a doubt that _they are right_, and that I (together with Smith and
     Brandis) _was wrong_.”[325]

Such a frank, truth-loving spirit in the enquirer is as sure a guarantee
of ultimate success as that “continuity in the enquiry,” which Gomperz
still holds to be established. In a word, the right track is known, but
the sign-posts have to be rectified; the key is found, but its wards
need some fresh adjustment; and we may soon hope for results far more
fruitful than those of which, for a moment only, we have been
disappointed.

Meanwhile it is well to put on record Professor Gomperz’s reply to the
objections that may be brought forward against the probable conclusion
that, even before the Homeric times, there existed Greeks acquainted
with a written language.

     “For this supposition is not only opposed by ancient, though
     possibly unhistoric traditions, such as the denial of the
     settlement of Asia Minor by European Greeks, but by really
     historical facts--for instance, the total absence of any mention of
     the art of writing in these very Homeric poems.

     “However this objection--let it count for as much or as little as
     it may--affects not only our decipherings, but also a firmly
     established and quite undeniable fact, the existence of a Cyprian
     syllabic writing. For that a nation which knew of a written
     language, simple and handy as the Phœnician with its facility of
     supplying the vowels, should prefer one like the Cyprian, full of
     the most troublesome characters and yet subject to the worst
     ambiguity, is surely as unlikely as that a nation in possession of
     the needle-gun should return to the use of the battle-axe. However,
     in the ninth and at latest in the eighth-century (and very probably
     much earlier) the Greeks _must_ already have been acquainted with
     the so-called Phoenician writing, which at that time was employed
     with equal readiness both in Moab and in Nineveh. Hence the Cyprian
     writing must have found its way among the Greeks before this epoch
     (and we may almost safely say a considerable time before this
     epoch, for otherwise how could it have taken firm root in Cyprus
     only?) My opinion is that we shall soon find the definite outlines
     of an epoch of Greek culture, or semi-culture, which I should be
     inclined to name the _pre-Cadmean_, the decline of which may
     probably be dated from the mighty impulse which the conquest of
     Canaan by the Israelites (about 1300) gave to the migration and the
     colonization of the Phœnicians.”[326]

We are enabled, by a communication from Dr. Schliemann, to present a
list of all the objects in his collection, which Professor Gomperz has
recognised as bearing Inscriptions, all of which are figured in our
work. We also append the _depth_ at which each object was found,
inasmuch as this determines to which of the nations, that dwelt
successively on the site of Ilium, each inscription is to be referred;
and this is by no means the least interesting point in the
investigation.

It will be understood, of course, that this is, in the strongest sense,
a “first provisional list” of the results of an enquiry only just
begun. We believe that we could make no inconsiderable additions to it;
but we await the verdict of the more competent enquirers who are now
engaged in the research. Their labours may show that the _lowest
stratum_ of remains is not destitute of traces of a written language, as
would appear at first sight from the List. Meanwhile the great
preponderance of known inscriptions from the “Trojan stratum” (7-10 M.)
of Dr. Schliemann is very striking: 11 out of the 18 belong to it. But
the ethnic affinity between the Trojans and their successors, already
attested by many proofs, is now confirmed by five inscriptions in the
Cyprian character from the depths of 4, 5, and 6 meters (Nos. 5, 6, 7,
12 and 16 in the List). The two funnels (Nos. 17, 18) are furnished by
the uppermost stratum: each bears only a single letter, which appears
also to be Cyprian; but there would seem to be still some doubt whether
it may not be Phœnician.

[Illustration: No. 300. Terra-cotta Ball (4 M.).

_a._ Side View. _b._ Upper Hemisphere. _c._ Lower Hemisphere, with the
Inscription.]




LIST OF INSCRIPTIONS

RECOGNIZED TO THE PRESENT TIME ON OBJECTS IN DR. SCHLIEMANN’S
COLLECTION.[327]


  I.--INSCRIPTIONS ON WHORLS.

      In Translation.             In Atlas.           Depth.   References.

   1. Pl. XXIV. No. 353.          Pl. 5, No. 166.     9 M.
   2. Pl. XXVII. No. 369.         Pl. 11, No. 356.    10 M.    Pp. 137, 369.
   3. Pl. LI. No. 496.            Pl. 13, No. 432.    7 M.    {Identical
   4. No. 115, p. 161.            Pl. 6. No. 208.     7 M.    {inscription:
                                                              {pp. 83, 137,
                                                              {161, 365-368.
   5. Pl. XXXIX. No. 435.         Pl. 122, No. 2442.  5 M.
   6. Pl. XLVI. No. 472.          Pl. 162, No. 3134.  6 M.
   7. Pl. XXV. No. 360.           Pl. 173, No. 3364.  4 M.
   8. Pl. LI. No. 494.            Pl. 187, No. 3415.  7 M.
   9. No. 227, p. 312.            Pl. 164, No. 3193.  8 M.     Page 312.
  10. No. 291, p. 363.            Pl. 166, No. 3233.  8 M.

  II.--INSCRIPTIONS ON TERRA-COTTA BALLS.

  11. Pl. LII. No. 497.           Pl. 166, No. 3229.  8 M.
  12. No. 300, p. 372.            Pl. 135, No. 2699.  4 M.

  III.--ON OTHER OBJECTS.

  13. _Seal_, No. 4, p. 24.       Pl. 19, No. 555.    7 M.     Pp. 24, 368.
  14. _Whetstone_, No. 5, p. 24.  Pl. 190, No. 3474.  7 M.     Pp. 24, 368.
  15. _Vase_, No. 3, p. 23.      {Pl. 168, No. 3273,} 8 M.     Pp. 307, 369.
                                 {  3278.           }
  16. _Vase_, Nos. 31, 32, p. 50. Pl. 161, No. 3092.  5½ M. Pp. 50, 309.
  17.{Pair of Funnels, Nos.}     {Pl. 171, No. 3292.} 3. M.    Pp. 191, 366.
  18.{  145, 146, p. 191.  }     {Pl. 171, No. 3295.}




INDEX.


A.

_Accidents_ in the work, 132, 147, 275;
  no one killed or seriously injured, 357.

_Achilles_, tumulus of, 177, 178.

_Achilleum_, town of, 178.

_Æneas_, his supposed dynasty at Troy, 19, 182.

_Æsyetes_, tumulus of, 182.

_Agate_, fine, balls of, 165.

_Aianteum_, town of, 178.

_Ajax_, tumulus of, 177, 178, 197.

_Akshi-koï_, as proposed site for Troy, refuted, 45.

_Alexander the Great_, at Ilium, 61, 146, 178, 251.

_Altar_, the great primitive, 277, 278, 291.

_Altars_, flaming, an Aryan emblem on the terra-cottas, 120, 121, 160.

_Amphora_, a large Trojan, 63.

_Antelopes_, an Aryan emblem on the terra-cottas, signifying
 the winds, 120, 135, 136.

_Antlers_ of deer, 165.

_Apollo_, temple of the Thymbrian, 177;
  Greek temple at Ilium, and bas-relief of, 32, 145, 223, 257.
(TEMPLE METOPÉ.)

_Aqueduct_ from the Thymbrius, remains of, 239.

_Archers_, supposed trench for, on the Tower, 318.

_Aristotle’s_ explanation of the δέπας ἀμφικύπελλον, 15, 313.

_Aruna_, in the Egyptian records, probably denotes Ilium, 126.

_Aryan_ origin of all the settlers at Hissarlik,
16, 252, 347, &c. (See SETTLERS.)

_Assyrian Art_, supposed traces of, 111.

_Athena_, tutelar goddess of Troy, represented with the head
 of an owl, 20, 54, 113, &c.

----, her temple, where the Trojan matrons went up to supplicate her, 147.

_Atlas_ of photographic illustrations, 357;
  Preface, p. v. foll.


B.

_Balls_, terra-cotta, with astronomical and religious
 symbols, 167, 168, 188, 364.

_Batiea_ or _Myrina_, tumulus of, 180, 197;
  now called _Pacha Tépé_, 198;
  opened, 301;
  pottery of the same age as the Trojan stratum at Hissarlik, _ibid._

_Battle-axes_, copper, found in the Treasure, 330, 331;
  of stone, 21, 252.
  (_See_ WEAPONS.)

_Bellerophon and Prœtus_, the σήματα λυγρά, 138.

_Bit_, a horse’s, a copper instrument resembling, 261.

_Boars'_ tusks, 78, 165.

_Bolts_, copper, of the Scæan Gates, 302.

_Bone_, a piece of, curiously engraved, 295.

_Bones_, found on the Tower, 213;
  human skull and ashes found in an urn, 267;
  of animals, 165, &c.
  (_See_ SKELETONS.)

_Bracelets_, of silver, gold, and electrum, 164, 165;
  golden, found in the Treasure, 337.

_Braun, Julius_, 46, 111.

_Bronze_, some  of the objects of the Treasure found to be of, 361.

_Brush-handle_, Trojan, of terra-cotta, with holes for the bristles, 297.

_Buddha_, sculptured foot-print of, with the 卐 and mystic rose, 103.

_Buildings_, of the first settlers, of stones joined with
 earth, 14, 134, 155-6.

----, of the second (or Trojans), of unburnt bricks with some
 stone foundations, 24, 96, 156, 302.

----, of the third settlers, of small stones joined with earth, 28, 166.

----, of the fourth settlers, the _wooden Ilium_, 29, 17.

----, of Greek Ilium, of hewn stone, 173.

----, great ruins of, 128, 132, 133, 134.

----, Trojan, quarry used for, 140, 141.

----, Trojan, burnt, 301, 302.

---- ----, proofs of their successive ages, 302.

----, on north platform, 316.

_Bunarbashi_, opinion of Lechevalier for, as the site of Troy,
 erroneous, 43, 123, 124, 217;
  no remains of a great city there, 43;
  the true site of Gergis, 44;
  reply to the arguments of M. Nikolaïdes for the site of, 176, 183;
  the springs at, 176;
  further excavations at, 318.

_Burnouf, Émile_, explains the Aryan symbols, 47, 51;
  quotation from, 103, 105;
  his drawings of whorls, vi., xliv.

_Buttress_, discovery of, 100;
  supporting the temple, 222;
  uncovering of great, 233.

_Byzantine remains_, supposed, 230, 250;
  none at Hissarlik, 32, 272, 319, 320.


C.

_Caldron_, copper, in the Treasure, 324.

_Calvert, Mr. Frank_, 70, 71, 144, 177, 245;
  reply to his article, 270, 275, 318, 319, 320.

_Canoes_, miniature, of terra-cotta, probably for salt-cellars, 79.

_Carrousel_ (i.e. _top_), name applied to the whorls, 16, 65. (_See_ WHORLS.)

_Cellar_, a small Greek, 279.

_Cellars_, none found, great earthen jars used instead of, 140. (_See_ JARS.)

_Chanaï Tépé_, mound of, 72.

_Chest_, inlaid piece of terra-cotta, supposed to be the lid of a, 129, 130;
  the chest which held the Treasure, 332;
    its key, 333;
  treasure-chests of Priam and Achilles, 333.

_Chimæra_, the, of Homer, 320.

_Chinese Libation Cup_, 326-7.

_Chiplak_, proposed site of Troy at, refuted by absence of remains, 45.

_Chronology of Troy_, 12, 27.

_City walls_, covered with ashes of a conflagration, 16. (_See_ WALLS.)

_Civilization_, progressive decline in, among the successive
 inhabitants of the hill, 29;
  higher, below what seemed the “Stone Age,” 75;
  marks of, increasing with depth reached, 82, 128, 134.

_Coins_, Greek and Roman found at Hissarlik; none later than
 Constans II., and Constantine II., 32, 62, 64-65, 206, 207, 253, 354.

_Copper_, silver, and gold, contemporaneous use of, for tools,
 weapons, vases and ornaments, 22;
  Trojan implements and weapons of, 82;
  nails and pins with gold and electrum heads, 253, 254;
  curious plate of, in the Treasure, 325;
  vase in the Treasure, _ibid._;
  helmets and a lance, 279, 281;
  objects comparatively few, as they may have been melted down
 again and again, 269, 270.

_Covers_, for vases, of terra-cotta;
  with crown-shaped handles, 25, 48, 86, 95, 268;
  with a single arched handle, 296;
  with the face of an owl, 34, 171;
  with human faces, but still approaching the owl, 115, 268.

_Crucible_ of terra-cotta, still containing some copper, 283.

_Crystal_, hexagon of, 260.

_Cups_, long two-handled, of terra-cotta, 86, 87, 95;
  larger and finer in the Trojan stratum, 158, than in the
 fourth stratum, 166, 171;
  a very large one, 263.
  (_See_ Δέπας ἀμφικύπελλον.)

_Cuttings_, on the north side, 61, 62;
  great, construction of, 88;
  new, 186;
  new, from S. E. to N. W., 230.

_Cylinder_ of felspar, like the Assyrian signet cylinders, 312.

_Cyprian Inscriptions_ (Appendix), 365, 366;
  the key to the Trojan, 366;
  progress of their decipherment, 369, 370.


D.

_Daggers_, copper, found in the Treasure, 331, 332. (_See_ WEAPONS.)

_Damour, M._, his analysis of Trojan metal, 361.

_Depths_ at which the objects were found carefully noted, 27, 219.

_Drawings_ of the objects found, 357.

_Débris_, Diagram of the strata of, 10.

----, thickness of, above native rock, 123;
  depth of, unexampled in the world, 217, 218;
  supposed, of the temple of Athena, 221, 222.

_Demetrius_, of Scepsis, his site for Troy at the “Village
 of the Ilians” adopted by Strabo, 41;
  refuted, 42.

“Δέπας ἀμφικύπελλον,” the, 15, 50, 128, 313-316;
  the great golden one of the Treasure, 326-7.

_Destruction_ of walls of former settlers, 156, 157;
  of third town, 170;
  of Trojan buildings, in excavating below them, 348.

_Diadems_, the two golden, found in the Treasure, 335, 336.

_Diagram_ of the successive _strata_ of ruins at Hissarlik, 10.

_Dishes_, terra-cotta, with side-rings, 155, 172, 215;
  (φιάλαι, _pateræ_), of silver, in the Treasure, 329.

_Drawings_, care in making, 219;
  an artist taken to make good, 225.

_Dumbrek Su_, the ancient Simoïs, 358.


E.

_Ear-rings_, of silver, gold, and electrum, 164, 165;
  of gold, found in the Treasure, their unique form, 118, 119, 336, 337.

_Ebony_, piece of a musical instrument, 165.

_Electrum_, a mixture of gold and silver, 165, 254, 327;
  objects of, found, _ibid._, 334.

_Emblems_, Aryan, on the whorls, balls, &c.;
  their significance, 101, 102;
  occurrence of, among other Aryan nations, 102;
  mentioned in old Indian literature, 102, 103;
  solar, and rotating wheels, 136, 137.

_Epithets_, Homeric, of Ilium, suitable to Hissarlik, 124, 125.

_Etymology_ of Ἴλιος, 125, 126.

_Excavations_, the “grandmother of the,” 316;
  final close of the, 356;
  intended resumption of, Preface, p. xxiii.
  (_See_ WORKS.)

_Explorers_, advice to future, 346.


F.

_Falcon_, the, an Aryan emblem on the terra-cottas, 120, 135.

_Fever_, dangers from, 62, 258.

_Fire_, marks of great in the ruins, 109, 133, 228, 277, 347;
  narrow escape from, 275.

_Firman_, for making the excavations, 59.

_Fortifications_, of the hill, 289, 290;
  further discoveries of, 322.
  (_See_ WALLS.)

_Funereal Urns._ (_See_ URNS.)

_Funnels_, small, of terra-cotta, with inscriptions, 191.


G.

_Gate_, discovery of a double, with copper bolts, 302, 303;
  the Scæan, of Homer, 303-305.

_Genealogy_ of the kings of Troy, 123.

_Georgios Photidas_, 116.

_Gergis_; identified with the ruins at Bunarbashi, 44, 245.

_Goblets_;
  curious terra-cotta, 317;
  of gold, silver, and electrum, found in the Treasure, 325, 327, 329.

----, the double-handled. (_See_ Δέπας ἀμφικύπελλον.)

_Gold_, modes of working, 327.

----, ornaments of. (_See_ ORNAMENTS.)

_Gold._ (_See_ TREASURE.)

_Gomperz, Professor_, on the Trojan and Cyprian inscriptions
 (Appendix) 367, 370.

_Greek_ camp, 179.

---- inscriptions. (_See_ INSCRIPTIONS.)

----, city of Ilium, area of, 217.

---- sculptured marbles, 226.

---- house, discovery of, 254, 255.

---- bas-relief, remarks on, 255, 257.

---- votive discs of diorite, 269.

---- statuettes and vessels, 317, 343. (_See_ TERRA-COTTAS.)

_Greek Race_, affinity of the Trojans to the (Appendix), p. 364.

_Grote, George_, places Homer’s Troy at Hissarlik, 46.


H.

_Hammer_ (ῥαιστήρ) only once mentioned in Homer, 270. (_See_
 IMPLEMENTS and STONE.)

_Handles_ of sticks or sceptres, 260, 265.

_Haug, Dr. Martin_, finds the key to the Trojan Inscriptions (Appendix), 366.

_Hares_, an Aryan emblem on the terra-cotta, signifying the
 Moon and four seasons, 120.

_Heat_ at Hissarlik, 142, 198.

_Hector_, his so-called tomb and grove, at Ophrynium, 74, 177;
  place of his death, 176, 195.

_Helmet-crests_, Trojan, their structure, 280.

_Helmets_, found on the skulls of Trojan warriors, 279;
  found in the Palace, 333.

_Hera_, personification of, as ox-headed (Ἥρα βοῶπις), 113, 114, 293, 353.

_Herodotus_, quoted, 12.

_Hieroglyphics_ on terra-cottas from the Greek stratum, 291, 352.

_Hippotamus_ of terra-cotta, a sign of intercourse with Egypt, 228, 270.

_Hissarlik_, the hill of, ruins upon, 14;
  limit of Troy’s extent, 18;
  modern authorities in favour of, 46;
  the name means “fortress,” 60;
  description of, 58;
  the Acropolis of the Greek Ilium, 60, 61;
  search for its limits, 61;
  panoramic view from, 68, 69;
  growth of the Hill, 97;
  great increase of Hill to east, 227.

_Homer_, knew the Troad, but his knowledge of Troy only
 traditional, 18, 20, 305;
  poetic exaggerations of its extent, 344-346;
  his hot and cold fountains of Scamander, 195;
  his Great Tower of Ilium, 201, 204;
  stone implements not mentioned by, 270, 271.

----, the _Iliad_, quoted, 19, 26, 69, 71, 121, 123, 130,
 138, 147, 179, 195, 197, 203, 222, 223, 238, 248, 265, 270,
 271, 280, 281, 305, 306, 314, 324, 326, 328, 333, 335, 336,
 337, 345, 346.

----, the _Odyssey_, quoted, 129, 305.

_Houses_, Trojan, discovered, 133;
  spacious, 155, 156;
  mode of building, _ibid._;
  easily crushed, _ibid._;
  several storeys high, 345;
  built of sun-dried bricks, only the important buildings
 being of small stones joined with earth, 273, 349.

----, succession of, beneath the temple, in strata of
 different ages, with marks of destruction by fire, 289, 290.

----, two large, of different dates, above the Scæan Gate, 301;
  the upper and later one, above Priam’s palace, 302, 304;
  objects found there, 314, 315.
  (_See_ PALACE.)

----, on the N. side of the hill, and objects found there, 351.

_Humming-top_, a Trojan, 192.

_Hurricane_, continual, on Homer’s “windy Ilium,” 185.


I.

_Ida_, Mount, name of, 121;
  the Trojans dwelt first on its spurs, 123;
  snow-clad summits of, but snow not perpetual, 70, 121.

_Idols_, of the Ilian Athena, 35, 36, 100, 112, 154, 155,
 163, 164, 170, 172, 229, 234, 235, 236, 260, 292, 296, 353.

----, of terra-cotta, marble, &c., found in all the pre-Hellenic
 strata, 34-38, &c.;
  one of slate, 260.

_Ilians_, village of the;
  no traces of habitation at, 42, 70, 85, 92, 180.
  (_See_ DEMETRIUS OF SCEPSIS.)

_Ilium_ (Homer’s Ἴλιος), first founded by Dardanus in the Plain, 123;
  etymology of the name, 125.
  (_See_ TROY.)

----, Greek, built under the Lydian dominion, about 700 B.C., 12, 13, 174;
  its duration, 13, 30;
  extent and population, 32, 198;
  site described, 57, 58;
  Greek buildings, 173, 174;
  springs in front of, 194, 196;
  name of, given, to the ruins at Hissarlik, 211;
  patronage of, by the Julii, 232;
  relation of kings Antiochus I. and III. to, 244, 246;
  site uninhabited since the end of the fourth century, 318;
  confused with Alexandria Troas, 319.

_Images_, of the owl-faced Athena. (_See_ IDOLS and ATHENA.)

_Implements_ of stone and copper, found together, 28, 30, 81, 83;
  stone, of the earliest settlers, 94;
  stone, further discoveries of, 112, 163, &c.;
  stone, coarser in third stratum, 167;
  of copper, of the fourth settlers, 173;
  of stone, copper, and silver, found on the Tower, 213;
  of stone and copper, 238, 261, 262;
  stone, at small depths, 251, 252;
  smaller quantity of copper than stone explained, 269, 270;
  stone, 285;
  found in Priam’s house, 311, 313.

_Inscriptions_, proving the use of a written language, 23, 25, 51.

----, supposed, 83, 84, 96, 130;
  remarks on, 137, 138, 161.

----, _Trojan_, in the Cyprian character, progress of the attempts to
 decipher them, and conclusions drawn from them. (Appendix, pp. 363, foll.);
  List of, 373.

----, _Cyprian_ (Appendix), 366, 369, foll.

----, _Greek_, 67, 68, 205;
  in honour of Caius Cæsar, 231.

----, discussion of two important, 240, 247;
  on base of a statue, 297;
  in honour of C. Claudius Nero, 298, 299;
  on vases found in the Palace, 339;
  Greek, 355, 356.

_Instruments._ (_See_ IMPLEMENTS.)

_Interruptions_ of the work, through
weather and Greek festivals, 90, 122, 224, 300;
  from the continual hurricane on the hill, 185.

_Iron_, absence of, 31, 253;
  does not imply that it was not used, 31.

_Ivory_, ornaments of, 149, 165;
  ornamented pieces of flutes and lyres, 25, 27, 230, 264;
  prettily decorated tube of, 268.


J.

_Jars_, Greek, for water and wine, 175;
  Trojan, large, used for cellars, 140, 239, 251, 277;
  the nine colossal, 290.

_Jerusalem_, depth of _débris_ at, 218.

_Jugs_, terra-cotta, with long necks bent back, 87, 114, 159, 166, 214, 236;
  curious double, 152;
  with two necks, 351.

----, large silver, of the Treasure, in which the small
 gold jewels were found, 329.


K.

_Key_ of the Treasure-chest, 333.

_Knives_, flint, 94, 271, 274, 275.

---- (_See_ IMPLEMENTS.)

_Konstantinos Kolobos_, 198, 199.


L.

_Lamps_, little bowls perhaps used for, 190.

----, Greek, 292, 317.

_Lance-heads_, copper, one found beside a warrior’s
 skeleton in the Palace, 279;
  found in the Treasure, 329, 330;
  mode of fastening to the shaft, 331.
  (_See_ WEAPONS.)

_Landerer_, Professor, on the material and colouring of the terra-cottas, 49;
  his analysis of the copper objects of the Treasure, 342.

_Language_ of the Trojan Inscriptions, probably Greek (Appendix), 369, foll.

_Laurent, Adolphe_, the engineer, 98, 99, 108, 116;
  his ground plans, 357.

_Lead_, a _pig_ of, _i. e._ a plate stamped with a pig’s head (Greek), 317.

_Libations_, probable use of the δέπας ἀμφικύπελλον, for, 326;
  a Chinese cup for, 327.

_Lightning_, symbol of, on the whorls, 137, 138.

_Lions_, formerly in the Troad, 260;
  lion-headed handle of a sceptre, 260.

_Liquorice_, cultivation of, 225, 226.

_Lysimachus_, wall of Greek Ilium, built by, 31, 58, 127, 185, 230, 231.

----, theatre of, 198.


M.

_Medals._ (_See_ COINS.)

_Medicine_;
  fever and quinine, 88;
  wounds and arnica, 89;
  blood-letting priest-doctors, 141;
  efficacy of sea-baths, 141, 142;
  ingratitude of peasants cured, 142.

_Metals_, found in various strata, 31.

----, copper and bronze, silver, gold, lead, 22, 31, &c.;
  no iron or tin, 31.

----, hardly a trace in third stratum, 166.

_Meters_, Table of, in English measures, 56.

_Metopé_ of the Sun-God, 32, 145, 223, 256, 257.

_Metrodorus_, statue of, 297.

_Mill-stones_, 79, 87, 151, 155, 163.

_Monograms_, on the stones of the wall of Lysimachus, 231.

_Moulds_ of mica-schist, for casting implements and ornaments
 of copper, 82, 88, 110, 139, 162, 173, 253, 260, 269.

_Mouse_, the, as an emblem, 186.

_Musical Instruments_, fragments of, 25, 27, 164, 165, 169, 230, 264.

_Myrina_, Tumulus of. (_See_ BATIEA.)


N.

_Nails_, of copper, 150, 253, 254, 261.

_Nikolaïdes, Mr. G._, reply to his article, 175, foll.

_Novelty of the Discoveries_, and consequent changes of opinion, 12.


O.

_Object_, the great, aimed at in the excavations, 80, 96, 97.

_Objects discovered_, 64;
  review of, 92, 96;
  of gold, silver, copper, and ivory, 149;
  bracelets and ear-rings of silver, gold, and electrum, 164, 165;
  pins, &c., of ivory and bone, 165;
  various, 165;
  little bowls, probably for lamps, 190;
  funnels, 191;
  more than 100,000 found, to the end of 1872, 218;
  sling-bullets, 230;
  various, 260, 264;
  a crucible with copper still in it, 283;
  found to the east of the Tower, 291.

_Ophrynium_, ruins of, 74, 177.

_Ornaments_, of gold, silver, copper, and ivory, 149, 150, 164, 165.

_Owl-faced covers_, 47, 48.

---- idols. (_See_ IDOLS.)

---- vases, 78, 229, &c.;
  found in the Palace, 340.

_Owl-headed_ goddess, 20, 23;
  Professor Max Müller on the, 54.
  (_See_ ATHENA.)

_Ox-headed idols_, old representation of the goddess Hera, 113;
  expected discovery of, 113, 114;
  handles in terra-cotta, 293, 294, 353.


P.

_Painted Vases_, only two fragments of, 15, 55, 193.

_Palace of Priam_, discovery of, 276;
  description of, 305, 306;
  objects found in it, 307-314, 333, 334;
  another room discovered, 340;
  objects found there, 341, foll.

_Pavements_;
  of flags on road through the Scæan Gate, 16, 287, 302;
    the part calcined by the conflagration, perishing by
 exposure to the air, 354, 355;
  of white sea-pebbles, 351.

_Pegs_ of terra-cotta, for hanging up clothes, 320.

_Pergamus of Troy_, 117, 211;
  as distinct from the city, an invention of Homer, 18.
 (But _see_ Preface, p. xvi.)

_Pillars_, no trace of, below the Greek stratum, 211;
  not mentioned in the Iliad, 211.

----, _Corinthian_, of the age of Constantine, 30, 230, 239, 250, 320.

_Pins_ of copper, ivory, and bone, 150, 165, 253, 254;
  copper, molten together in the burning of the Palace, 312.

_Plague_ of insects and scorpions, 198.

_Plates_, Trojan, turned by the potter, 114, 215, 263.

_Platform_, great, on the north, 99;
  progress of, 108, 127, 185.

----, on the south, 127.

----, a third dug, 144.

_Polychronios Lempessis_, the draughtsman, commended, 357.

_Pottery_, splendid remains of Trojan, 25;
  coarser, in the third stratum, 27;
  fragments of Hellenic, 44;
  ancient types of, still made in the Troad, 47;
  colouring, materials of the, 49, 50;
  of fine workmanship, 75;
  resembles the Cyprian and that found at Thera and Therasia, 115;
  of lowest stratum, distinct from the next above, 153;
  resembles the Etruscan in quality only, 153;
  of second settlers, various forms, 158, 159;
  in third stratum, various forms, 167;
  of fourth settlers, inferior, 170;
  articles of, 190, 191;
  found on the Tower, 213, 215;
  various, 262, 263, 285;
  with Egyptian hieroglyphics, 291;
  Greek, 127.

_Prayer_, man in attitude of, on a whorl, 135.

_Priam_, where he sat to view the Greek forces, 304, 305;
  his Palace, 276, 306, foll.;
  his Treasure, 22, 323, foll.
  (_See_ PALACE; TREASURE.)

----, why the author uses the name, 20, and Preface, xxiii.-xxiv.

_Priapi_ of stone and terra-cotta, 78.

_Pytheas_, sculptor, of Argos, 298.


Q.

_Quarry_ used for the buildings at Troy, 140.

_Quoits_, 94, 154, &c.


R.

_Rain_, injury done by, 221.

_Remains_, ancient, undisturbed, 111, 112;
  admirable, in lowest stratum but one, 148, 149;
  in the lowest stratum, 154;
  of an Aryan race, 166;
  of house walls, 264.

----, human, paucity of, 210.

_Reservoir_ of the Temple, 249.

_Restoration_ of broken terra-cottas, 41.

_Results_ of the excavations, 92, 216, 346; and Introduction _passim_.

_Road_, paved with flags, through the Scæan Gate, 16, 287, 302, 305.

_Rosa Mystica_, an Aryan emblem on the whorls, 160, 207.


S.

_Sacrifices_, traces of, 108, 109.

_Scamander_, the river and its ancient course, 72-74, 177, 179, 183.

_Scæan Gate_, the double, 16, 26, 287, 303;
  plan of, 306.
  (_See_ ROAD.)

----, copper bolts found in both gateways, 302.

_Sceptre_, the Homeric, 265.

_Schliemann, Dr. Henry_, born at Kalkhorst, in Mecklenburg-Schwerin, 3;
  enthusiasm as a boy for the Greek heroic legends, _ib._;
  early disadvantages, 3;
  shipwreck, 4;
  self-tuition, 5;
  goes to Russia, 7;
  learns Greek, 7;
  his travels, 7;
  gains an independent fortune, 8;
  visits Ithaca, the Peloponnesus, and Troy, 8;
  devotes his life and fortune to archæology, 8;
  summary of his work at Hissarlik, the site of Troy,
 _Introduction_, 12, foll.;
  excavations in 1871, Chaps. I.-V., pp. 59-97;
    in 1872, Chaps. VI.-XIV., pp. 98-223;
    in 1873, Chaps. XV.-XXIII., pp. 224-353.

_Schliemann, Madame_, a Greek lady, enthusiastic for Greek archæology, 62;
  arrival of, in 1871, 59;
  finds terra-cottas, 174.

_Schmidt, Moritz_, on the Cyprian Inscriptions (Appendix), p. 370.

_Scoops_ of terra-cotta, 296.

_Scoriæ_, layer of metallic, throughout the hill, 344.

_Sculpture_, numerous fragments of Greek, 32, 249;
  their wonderful freshness, 320.
  (_See_ METOPÉ.)

_Seals_ of terra-cotta, 24, 130.

_Serpents_, heads of horned, and without horns, in terra-cotta, 236, 238, 292;
  superstitious reverence for the horned serpents, _ibid._

_Settlers_, earliest, on the Hill of the Aryan race, 15, 16, 148, 157.

----, second, the Trojans of Homer, 16;
  long duration of, 157;
  their Aryan descent proved, 157;
  their remains, 157, foll.

----, third, also of the Aryan race, 27;
  their remains, 166, foll.

----, fourth, of Aryan race, 29;
  but comparatively savage, 170.

----, probable traces of another settlement between the
 fourth pre-Hellenic people and the Greek colonists, 54, 55.

_Sharks_, bones of, 66, 165.

_Shells_, found in abundance, 66, 165, &c.

_Shield_ represented on an image of the Ilian goddess, 37, 311.

----, copper, in the Treasure, 324.

_Silver_ plates and vessels in the Treasure, 328, 329;
  vases found in the Palace, 333, 334, 342.

_Simoïs_, valley of, 74, 177;
  sources and course of, 196, 197;
  the present _Dumbrek_, 358.

_Site_, purchase of the, 58, 59.

_Skeletons_;
  of a six-months’ embryo, 153, 154;
  of a woman, with ornaments of gold, 209, 210;
  two, of warriors, with arms, 17, 279.

_Sling-bullets_, of load-stone, 101;
  of copper, alabaster, and diorite, 230;
  metal, analysis of, 362.

_Snakes_, venomous, 99, 100, 130;
  snake-weed, 117, 118.

_Socket_, stone, of a door, 211.

_Spits_, supports for, in mica-schist, 261.
  (NOTE.--_These call to mind the frequent allusions in
 Homer to roasting pieces of meat on spits._)

_Springs_ close to Hissarlik, 183;
  the springs of Homer, 195.

_Stone_, weapons of, 21;
  large blocks of, 90, 109, 110;
  implements of better workmanship in the lower strata, 112;
  scarce with fourth settlers, 173;
  weights, handmills, and knives and saws of flint, 173.
  (_See_ IMPLEMENTS; WEAPONS.)

“_Stone Age_” not denoted by the stone implements, 21, 22;
  coincides with
the “age of copper,” 21;
  reappears in full force, 75, 76.

_Stones_ of Troy, carried off for neighbouring buildings, 221.

_Storks_, in the Troad, but none on the hill of Hissarlik, 265.

_Strabo_, adopts the wrong theory of the site of Troy, 41;
  never visited the Troad, 41;
  quoted, 41, 74, 123, 146, 177, 178;
  error of, about the utter destruction of Troy, 348.

_Strata_, four, of remains on the hill of Hissarlik, 13, 14;
  table of, 10.

_Stratum_, distinction between the Trojan and the lowest, 343, 344;
  the author’s former opinion recalled, 344.

_Street_, a, in the Pergamus, 287, 288.

_Suastika_, the sign, of the, 16, 39;
  its different forms, 卐 and [Illustration: block-style cross], 101;
  its origin and significance, 101, foll.;
  wide prevalence among the Aryan nations, 102, foll.;
  in the Vedic hymns, 104, 105;
  on the whorls, 107, 118, 119;
  on a piece of pottery, 157.

_Succession_ of nations on the hill, regular, proved, 175.

_Sun_, the, constantly on the whorls, 161, 187, &c.

_Superstition_ of Greeks about Saints’ days, 131.

_Sword_, copper, in the Treasure, 332.

_Symbols_ on terra-cottas, 16;
  prove the Trojans to be an Aryan race, 25;
  of the moon, 136;
  astronomical and religious, 167, 168.
  (See EMBLEMS; TERRA-COTTAS; WHORLS.)

----, of the Ilian Athena, on vases, 35, 37. (_See_ ATHENA.)


T.

_Table_ of French and English measures, 56;
  of Trojan weights, 359, 360;
  of Inscriptions found at Hissarlik, 373.

_Talents_, of Homer, their small value, 328;
  probably such as the blades of silver found in the Treasure, 328.

_Tassels_, golden, in the Treasure, 336;
  on the ægis of Athena and the zone of Hera, 336, 337.

_Temple_ of Ajax, 177, 178.

----, Greek, of Apollo, 146, 257.

_Temple_, Trojan, of Athena, on the Pergamus, mentioned
 by Homer, 147, 222, 223;
  doubt as to its real existence, 346.

----, Greek, of Athena, excavation of, 186;
  supposed débris of, 221, 222;
  drain of, 223;
  Doric style of, 223;
  excavations on site of, 226;
  ruins of, 240, 249, 278, 279;
  reservoir of, 249;
  ancient houses under, 289, 290.

----, a small, at Ilium, in the time of Alexander, 146, 147, 251;
  traces of a small, and objects found on its site, 234, 236.

_Terra-cottas_ found at Hissarlik, 15, foll.;
  their materials and colours, 49;
  with two holes and a stamp in the Greek stratum, 65, 174, 269;
    at lower depths, 295;
  models of canoes, 79;
  small round perforated pieces, perhaps for spindles, 79;
  fine vessels of remarkable form, 85, 87;
  a remarkable one, 130;
  with Aryan symbols, 135, 136 (_see_ WHORLS);
  remarkable vessels of, 149, 152;
  seals, 162;
  coarser in third stratum, 167;
  balls, with astronomical and religious symbols, 167, 168, 188;
    with inscriptions, 372, 373;
  plain and painted, of Greek Ilium, 174;
  Greek statuettes in, 186;
  balls, with suns, stars, &c., 188, 364;
  a bell, 192;
  various and beautiful, 192, 194;
  material, colour, and mode of engraving, 193-4;
  found at small depths, 207;
  hippopotamus, bright red, 228;
  vases of curious shape, 229;
  serpents’ heads, 236, 238;
  a decorated tube of, 293;
  found on the Tower, 281, foll., 286, 340;
  found in the Palace, 307-314;
  found in the later house above it, 314, 315;
  Greek, 279, 291, 317, 343;
  curious vessels found on the north side, 351;
  with hieroglyphics, 291, 351;
  heads of oxen and horses, 353.
  (_See_ VASES.)

_Thera_ (_Santorin_) and _Therasia_, the house-walls
 and pottery at Hissarlik like those in these islands, 79, 80, 115, 204.

_Thymbria_, 70, 71.

_Thymbrius_, the, 177;
  aqueduct from, 239.

_Tomb_ of Batiea or Myrina, 179, 180;
  identified with the Pacha Tépé, 198.

_Tombs_, the three so called, of heroes near Bunarbashi, are Greek, 44.

----, of Patroclus and Antilochus, 178.

_Tower_, Great, of Ilium, 16, 21, 26;
  discovery of, 201;
  splendid view from, 202;
  further excavation of, 212, 213;
  objects found on, 213;
  and on each side of, 215, 216;
  excavation of, 249, 250, 251;
  original height of, 254;
  great house on, 276, 277;
  plan of, 305;
  top discovered, 318;
  trench for archers, _ibid._;
  steps, _ibid._

----, of the Greek age, 323.

_Treasure_, of Priam, 17;
  the great discovery of, 323;
  expedient for its preservation, 323, 324;
  articles described, 324;
  copper shield, 324;
  copper caldron, 325;
  curious copper plate and silver vase, 325;
  copper vase, _ibid._;
  bottle and vases of gold,  325, 326;
  the golden δέπας ἀμφικύπελλον, 326, 327;
  electrum cup, 327;
  six blades or plates (_talents_), 328;
  silver vases, 329;
  silver goblet and dish, 329;
  copper lance-heads, 329, 330;
  copper battle-axes, 330, 331;
  copper daggers, sword, &c., 331;
  the articles fused together by the conflagration, 332;
  signs of having been packed in a wooden chest, 332, 333;
  key to chest found, 333;
  probably left behind in an effort to escape, 333, 334;
  great wall built over it, 334;
  gold jewels in a silver vase, 334, 335;
  two gold diadems, 335, 336;
  gold fillet and ear-rings, 336;
  bracelets and finger-rings, 337;
  ear-rings, 337;
  8750 small jewels of gold, 338-340.

----, copper articles analysed, 340, 361, 362.

_Tree of Life_ (the _Sôma-tree_), an Aryan emblem on
 the terra-cottas, 119, 120, 135, 160.

_Triglyphs_, block of (_See_ METOPÉ.)

_Troad_, good wine of the, 232.

_Trojans_ of Homer, 16, &c.;
  their affinity to the Greek race (Appendix), 364.

_Troy_, chronology of, 12, 123;
  first city destroyed by Hercules, 26;
  small extent of the Homeric, 18, 343, 344;
  discussion of site, 41;
  opinions of modern authorities, 43-46;
  plain of, and heroic _tumuli_, 70;
  the plain _not_ alluvial, 71;
  supposed ruins reached, 90;
  extent of the Pergamus, 117;
  naming of site as, 211;
  Homer’s, identified with the site of Greek Ilium, 216;
  return to, to take plans and photographs, 220;
  plain of, spring weather in, 248;
  tests of extent of, 304;
  its walls traced, 344;
  its reality established, 344;
  small, but as large as Athens and Mycenæ, 117, 344, 345;
  its wealth and power, 345;
  great height of its houses, 345;
  probable population, 17, 71, 176, 345;
  known to Homer only by tradition, 345, 346;
  its strata of burnt wood-ashes, 347;
  plan of, in Priam’s time, 347;
  part of real, destroyed in excavations, 348;
  the buildings brought to light by Schliemann, 349, 350;
  stones of, not used in building other cities, 348.

_Tub_ of terra-cotta, 341.

_Turkish Government_, the author’s relations with the,
 52, 53, and Preface, p. xxiii.

_Turks_, traces of former excavations by, 144.


U.

_Urns_, fragments of great, 110, 111, 129;
  one containing human remains, 153, 267;
  their _upright_ position, 111, 112, 175.


V.

_Vases_, with symbols of the Ilian Athena, 35, 37, 106,
 159, 208, 214, 258, 293, 294, 317;
  with uplifted wings, 48, 87;
  small two-handled, on feet, 87, 169;
  with rings for hanging up, 159, 167;
  of remarkable forms, 114, 115, 151, 152;
  fragments of decorated, 128, 135;
  in forms of animals, 159, 208, 209, 214, 352;
  finely decorated, 193;
  owl-faced, 229, 292;
  splendid, found on the Tower, 226;
  splendid, found in the Palace, 307, foll.;
  with
cuneiform decorations, 193;
  perforated, 352.
  (_See_ TERRA-COTTAS.)

_Vases_, silver, found in the Treasure, 325, 328, 329;
  in the Palace of Priam, 334, 342.

_Virgil_ quoted, 74, 177, 358.


W.

_Wall_, ancient, on northern slope, 200, 201, 217;
  retaining, on the south side of the hill, 221;
  of Troy, 227, 228, 316, 340;
  of Lysimachus, 230, 231.

_Walls_, damage done to remaining, 220;
  enormous, close below the surface, 230;
  further discoveries of, 250, 251;
  curious stone, three sets one above the other, near
 the Scæan Gate, of different periods, 288, 290.

_Weapons_, of stone, 21, 22, 79, 83, 168;
  of copper, and moulds for casting, 139, 162;
  and ornaments of stone, copper, and silver, 213.

_Weights_, supposed Trojan, 154;
  table of, 359, 360.

_Well_, Roman, 64, 93, 123.

----, in third stratum, 169.

----, Greek, 175, 162.

_Wheels_ in motion, whorls representing, 136, 137, 162.

_Whetstones_, 79, 169.

----, inscription on a, 24, 368.

_Whorls_, perforated, mostly of terra-cotta, with Aryan symbols, 38, 39;
  found in Italy, 39, 101;
  plain, 40, 41;
  in all the strata below the Greek, 65, &c.;
  sizes and materials, 66;
  a great number of, 77, 297;
  their use discussed, 77, 78, 84, 189, 190;
  engraved with the suastika, 101;
  with central suns, stars, suastika, the Sôma, and altars, 118, 121;
  with inscriptions (_see_ INSCRIPTIONS);
  with Aryan symbols, 133, 135, 136;
  with antelopes, praying man, altars, hares, 136;
  plain and engraved, 149;
  of lowest stratum, 160;
  their interesting devices, 160, 162;
  some of lead and fine marble, 162;
  in third stratum, 168;
  of fourth settlers, of a degenerate form, 170, 174;
  many with suastikas and suns, 186, 187;
  wheel-shaped, with simple patterns, 187;
  just below the surface, 207;
  on site of the Temple, 230;
  important distinction between plain and decorated, 232;
  various types, 255, 264;
  new types, 268, 269, 286;
  extreme fineness of engravings on, 284.

_Winds_, cold north, Homer’s “blasts of Boreas,” 224, 225.

“_Windy_” (ἠνεμόεσσα), fit epithet of Ilium, 185.

_Wooden Ilium_, built by the fourth settlers; its burnt _débris_, 29.

_Works_, the, difficulties of, 61, 96;
  cost of, 98, 204;
  dangers, and engineering expedients, 115, 116, 131, 132;
  narrow escape of six men, 132;
  fall of an earth-wall, 147, 148;
  plan of a
trench through the whole hill, 148;
  cost of, 184, 185;
  for security during the winter, 221;
  progress of, at S. E. corner, 239;
  difficulties of excavation of the Tower, 249;
  progress of, 259;
  further excavations on north side, 346, 347.

_Workmen_, number of, 64;
  new, 98;
  increase of, 184, 233;
  attempt forgery, 194;
  mode of naming them, 194;
  want of, 225, 226.

_Writing_, used at Troy long before Homer (Appendix), 369, foll.;
  answer to objections, 371.


X.

_Xerxes_, sacrifices at Ilium, 12, 61, 174.




ERRATUM.


     Page 345.--After the third paragraph, ending “from all quarters,”
     insert the  following:--

“Troy had therefore no separate Acropolis; but as one was necessary for
the great deeds of the Iliad, it was added by the poetical invention of
Homer, and called by him _Pergamus_, a word of quite unknown
derivation.”




COMPARATIVE TABLE OF THE ILLUSTRATIONS IN DR. SCHLIEMANN’S ATLAS AND THE
TRANSLATION.

NOTE.--In the columns headed “Translation” the _Roman numerals_ refer to
the _Plates_.

A (?) against Schliemann’s Numbers signifies that we have not been able
to identify the objects _certainly_ with those engraved by us from M.
Burnouf’s drawings.

  +--------------------+-----------------------+
  |       Atlas.       |      Translation.     |
  +--------------------+-----------------------+
  |  Pl.   No.         |  No.    Pl.           |
  |                    |                       |
  |   1,     1         | 317,    XXII.         |
  |          4         | 318,    XXII.         |
  |         10         | 475,    XLVI.         |
  |         12         | 319,    XXII.         |
  |         20         | 320,    XXII.         |
  |   2,    34         | 381,    XXX.          |
  |         35         | 380,    XXIX.         |
  |         36         | 382,    XXX.          |
  |         37         | 321,    XXII.         |
  |         42         | 410,    XXXV.         |
  |         51         | 322,    XXII.         |
  |         53         | 329,    XXII.         |
  |         57         |  42,    p. 80.        |
  |         58         | 324,    XXII.         |
  |         60         | 325,    XXII.         |
  |         61         | 482,    XLVIII.       |
  |         64         | 323,    XXII.         |
  |         65         | 413,    XXXV.         |
  |         66         | 327,    XXII.         |
  |   3,    70         | 328,    XXII.         |
  |         93         | 471,    XLV.          |
  |   4,   105         | 437,    XXXIX.        |
  |        124         | 480,    XLVIII.       |
  |        125         |  81,    p. 138.       |
  |        132         | 333,    XXIII.        |
  |   4,   133         | 330,    XXII.         |
  |   5,   134         | 430,    XXXVIII.      |
  |        136         | 398,    XXXIII.       |
  |        140         | 460,    XLIII.        |
  |        142         | 489,    XLIX.         |
  |        143?        | 354,    XXIV.         |
  |        145         | 476,    XLVI.         |
  |        156         | 408,    XXXIV.        |
  |        160         | 419,    XXXVI.        |
  |        161         | 332,    XXII.         |
  |        166         | 334,    XXIV.         |
  |        168         | 423,    XXXVII.       |
  |   6,   174         |  44,    p. 80.        |
  |        175         | 478,    XLVII.        |
  |        176         | 389,    XXXI.         |
  |        193         | 335,    XXIII.        |
  |        208         | 115,    pp. 161, 367  |
  |   7,   224         | 337,    XXIII.        |
  |        231         | 336,    XXIII.        |
  |   8,   237         | 352,    XXIV.         |
  |        242         | 490,    XLIX.         |
  |        245         | 384,    XXX.          |
  |        252         | 403,    XXXIV.        |
  |        253         | 400,    XXXIII.       |
  |        259         | 483,    XLVIII.       |
  |   8,   260         | 402,    XXIII.        |
  |        261         | 331,    XXII.         |
  |        263         |  43,    p. 80.        |
  |        264?        | 396,    XXXII.        |
  |        266         |  80,    p. 137.       |
  |        270         | 361,    XXVI.         |
  |   9,   272         | 416,    XXXVI.        |
  |        273         | 414,    XXXV.         |
  |        274         | 365,    XXVII.        |
  |        276         | 424,    XXXVII.       |
  |        279         | 338,    XXIII.        |
  |        282         | 356,    XXV.          |
  |        285         | 359,    XXV.          |
  |        288         | 377,    XXVIII.       |
  |        289?        | 372,[A] XXVIII.       |
  |        289?        | 411,[328] XXXV.         |
  |        294         | 370,    XXVII.        |
  |        295         | 362,    XXVI.         |
  |        296         | 380,    XXIX.         |
  |        297         | 447,    XLI.          |
  |        298         | 381,    XXX.          |
  |        299         | 379,    XXIX.         |
  |  10,   307         | 339,    XXIII.        |
  |        326         | 340,    XXIII.        |
  |        327         | 341,    XXIII.        |
  |        337         | 458,    XLIII.        |
  |  11,   344         | 387,    XXXI.         |
  |        346         | 392,    XXXII.        |
  |        356         | 369,    XXVII.        |
  |        356         | 298-9,  p. 369.       |
  |  12,   384         | 428,    XXXVIII.      |
  |        410         | 391,    XXXII.        |
  |  13,   418         | 344,    XXIII.        |
  |  13,   422         | 342,    XXIII.        |
  |        424         | 346,    XXIII.        |
  |        426         | 444,    XL.           |
  |        427         | 343,    XXIII.        |
  |        428         | 347,    XXIII.        |
  |        430?        | 466,    XLV.          |
  |        431         | 465,    XLIV.         |
  |        432         | 496,    LI. & p. 367. |
  |        433         | 345,    XXIII.        |
  |        434         | 348,    XXIII.        |
  |        436         | 301,    XXI.          |
  |        438         | 302,    XXI.          |
  |        442         | 303,    XXI.          |
  |        443         | 304,    XXI.          |
  |        445         | 305,    XXI.          |
  |        446         | 306,    XXI.          |
  |        448         | 307,    XXI.          |
  |        449         | 308,    XXI.          |
  |  14,   450         | 493,    LI.           |
  |        452         | 491,    L.            |
  |  15,   460         | 498,    LII.          |
  |        471         | 486,    XLIX.         |
  |  16,   472         | 484,    XLVIII.       |
  |        473         | 149,    p. 199.       |
  |        474         |  62,    p. 95.        |
  |        485         | 309,    XXI.          |
  |        486         | 310,    XXI.          |
  |        487         | 311,    XXI.          |
  |        488         | 312,    XXI.          |
  |        489         | 313,    XXI.          |
  |        491         | 314,    XXI.          |
  |        494         | 315,    XXI.          |
  |        497         | 316,    XXI.          |
  +--------------------+-----------------------+

  +--------------------+-----------------------+
  |       Atlas.       |      Translation.     |
  +--------------------+-----------------------+
  |  Pl.   No.         |  No.    Page.         |
  |  17,   503-4       |   2,     21           |
  |        512         | 142,    173           |
  |        513         |  37,     65           |
  |        518         |  38,     65           |
  |        519         |  39,     65           |
  |  18,   529         |  40,     65           |
  |        537         | 162,    232           |
  |        540         | 290,    353           |
  |  19,   541         | 143,    188           |
  |        546         | 116,    162           |
  |        553         | 147,    192           |
  |        554         | 148,    192           |
  |        555         |   4,     24, 368      |
  |        556         |  78,    130           |
  |  20,   562         | 109,    155           |
  |        564         |  24,     36           |
  |        565         |  18,     36           |
  |        566         |  15,     36           |
  |        567         |  12,    164           |
  |        568         |  16,     36           |
  |        570         |  20,     36           |
  |        572         | 141,    172           |
  |        577         |  23,     36           |
  |        578_a_      |  77,    129           |
  |        578_b_      |  76,    129           |
  |  21,   583         |  26,     36           |
  |        586         |  28,     36           |
  |        587         | 144,    190           |
  |  22,   592         |  71,    110           |
  |        601         |  56,     94           |
  |        610         |  57,     94           |
  |  24,   639         |  66,    101           |
  |        643         |  47,     83           |
  |        644         |  48,     83           |
  |        645         |  49,     83           |
  |  24,   646         |  50,     83           |
  |        656         |  67,    101           |
  |        657         |  68,    101           |
  |        660         | 122,    165           |
  |        661         | 123,    165           |
  |        662         | 124,    165           |
  |  25,   665         |  14,     36           |
  |        666         |  92,    159           |
  |        669         |  93,    150           |
  |        670         |  94,    150           |
  |        671         |  95,    150           |
  |        672         |  96,    150           |
  |        674         |  97,    150           |
  |        675         |  98,    150           |
  |        678         |  99,    150           |
  |        681         | 100,    150           |
  |        682         | 101,    150           |
  |        683         |  58,     94           |
  |        685         |  61,     94           |
  |        687         |  59,     94           |
  |        689         |  60,     94           |
  |  26,   700         |  83,    150           |
  |        701         |  84,    150           |
  |        702         |  85,    150           |
  |        703         |  86,    150           |
  |        705         |  87,    150           |
  |        713         |  90,    150           |
  |        718         |  88,    150           |
  |        719         |  89,    150           |
  |        720         |  91,    150           |
  |        721         |  79,    135           |
  |  27,   722         |   1,     15           |
  |        732         | 110,    157           |
  |        734         |  19,     36           |
  |  PLATE 30          | PLATE III.            |
  |  32,   774         | 131,    170           |
  |        775         |  10,     34           |
  |        776         |  11,     34           |
  |        779         |  64,     97           |
  |        782         | 136,    171           |
  |        786         | 137,    171           |
  |        787         | 134,    171           |
  |        788         | 135,    171           |
  |  34,   867         | 138,    172           |
  |        868         | 139,    172           |
  |  35,   872_a_      | 129,    169           |
  |        874         | 132,    171           |
  |        882         | 133,    171           |
  |  41,   994         | 125,    166           |
  |        996         | 130,    170           |
  |       1003         |  70,    106           |
  |  48,  1152         | 127,    167           |
  |  52,  1158         | 128,    167           |
  |       1257         | 126,    166           |
  |  54,  1275         |  13,     35           |
  |  55,  1287         |  41,     74           |
  |  61,  1374         | 233,    320           |
  |  64,  1433-5       | 157,    215           |
  |  65,  1440         | 150,    208           |
  |       1441         |  55,     87           |
  |       1446         |  12,     34           |
  |  67,  1497-8       | 232,    320           |
  |       1505         | 184,    268           |
  |  68,  1520         | 158,    219           |
  |  69,  1535         |  45_a_,  82           |
  |       1536         |  45_b_,  82           |
  |       1537         |  45_c_,  82           |
  |       1538         |  45_d_,  82           |
  |       1539         |  45_e_,  82           |
  |       1540         |  45_f_,  82           |
  |  69,  1541         |  45_g_,  82           |
  |       1553         |  46,     82           |
  |  72,  1582         |   6,     25           |
  |  75,  1623         |  74,    115           |
  |       1628         | 155,    214           |
  |       1630         | 113,    159           |
  |       1632         |  51,     86           |
  |  84,  1762         |  53,     87           |
  |       1768         | 111,    158           |
  |       1770         | 112,    158           |
  |  90,  1864         | 117,    163           |
  |       1880         | 118,    163           |
  |       1886         | 119,    163           |
  |  91,  1893         | 151,    208           |
  |  97,  2022         | 153,    209           |
  |       2025         | 104,    151           |
  |  98,  2044         |   8,     25           |
  | 101,  2272_a-d_    | 108,    155           |
  |       2272_g_      | 120,    163           |
  |       2272_l_      | 154,    211           |
  | 102,  2290-1       |  73,    114           |
  |       2292         | 102,    151           |
  |       2293         | 103,    151           |
  | 103,  2294         | 107,    153           |
  |       2296         | 106,    152           |
  | 104,  2298         | 105,    152           |
  |       2299         | 152,    209           |
  | PLATE 110          | PLATE VIII.           |
  | 114,  2317         | 156,    214           |
  |       2325         |  72,    110           |
  | PLATE 118          | MAP.                  |
  | 119,  2330         | 159,    228           |
  |       2331         |  65,     97           |
  | 120,  2352         | 160,    229           |
  |       2362         | 161,    229           |
  | 120,  2363         | 170,    237           |
  | 121,  2389         | 454,    XLII.         |
  |       2390-1?      | 477,    XLVII.        |
  |       2392         | 451,    XLII.         |
  |       2393         | 367,    XXVII.        |
  | 122,  2423         | 384     XXX.          |
  |       2432         | 171,    238           |
  |       2435         |   9,     27           |
  |       2438         | 165,    235           |
  |       2442         | 435,    XXXIX.        |
  |       2444         | 167,    236           |
  | 123,  2467         | 166,    236           |
  | 125,  2515         | 489,    XLIX.         |
  | 126,  2554         | 455,    XLIII.        |
  |       2555         | 164,    235           |
  |       2560         | 163,    234           |
  | PLATE 127          | PLATE IV.             |
  | 130,  2561         | 176,    261           |
  |       2577         | 177,    261           |
  | 132,  2613         | 172,    255           |
  |       2615         | 473,    XLVII.        |
  | 133,  2633         | 179,    264           |
  |       2638         | 180,    264           |
  |       2639         | 174,    260           |
  |       2662         | 202,    286           |
  | 134,  2664         | 193,    282           |
  |       2674         | 195,    283           |
  |       2683         | 192,    281           |
  | 135,  2694         | 404,    XXXIV.        |
  |       2699         | 300,    372           |
  |       2706         | 187,    268           |
  |       2707         | 186,    268           |
  |       2708         | 181,    265           |
  |       2721         | 189,    279           |
  | 138,  2741         |  82,    139           |
  | 138,  2746         |  63,     95           |
  | 139,  2755         | 178,    262           |
  | 140,  2768         |  52,     86           |
  |       2769         | 196,    283           |
  | 141,  2778         |  36,     63           |
  |       2780         | 197,    284           |
  |       2782         | 194,    282           |
  |       2784         | 199,    285           |
  | 142,  2791         | 191,    280           |
  |       2803         | 198,    285           |
  |       2806         | 200,    286           |
  |       2815         | 422,    XXVII.        |
  | 143,  2827         | 201,    p. 286        |
  |       2840         | 395,    XXXII.        |
  | 145,  2838 _bis_   | 215,    296           |
  |       2839 _bis_   | 204,    292           |
  | 146,  2850         | 190,    280           |
  | 147,  2862         | 209,    294           |
  |       2865         | 210,    295           |
  |       2889         |  29,     36           |
  |       2892         | 371,    XXVII.        |
  | 148,  2898         | 439,    XL.           |
  |       2899         |  29,    p. 36.        |
  |       2912         | 206,    293           |
  |       2921         | 216,    296           |
  |       2924         | 217,    297           |
  | 149,  2951         | 213,    296           |
  |       2952         | 209,    296           |
  |       2964         | 378,    XXVIII        |
  | 150,  2975         | 211,    295           |
  |       2977         | 203,    291           |
  |       2981         | 205,    292           |
  |       2984         | 487,    XLIX.         |
  |       2988         | 212,    p. 295        |
  |       2998         | 214,    296           |
  | PLATE  153         | PLATE V.              |
  | 154,  3050         | 168,    237           |
  |       3051         | 169,    237           |
  | PLATE 156          | PLATE XI. B.          |
  | PLATE 157          | PLATE IX.             |
  | 158,  3063         | 231,    317           |
  |       3065         | 220,    308           |
  | PLATE 159          | 188,    278           |
  | 160,  3084         | 229,    315           |
  | 161,  3087         | 228,    315           |
  |       3088         | 230,    315           |
  |       3089         |  54,     87           |
  |       3092         | 221,    309           |
  |       3092         | 33-4,    50           |
  |       3094         | 224,    311           |
  |       3095         | 222,    310           |
  |       3096         | 223,    310           |
  | 162,  3111         | 363,    XXVI.         |
  |       3117         | 464,    XLIV.         |
  |       3124         | 448,    XLI.          |
  |       3131         | 226,    312           |
  |       3134         | 472,    XLVI.         |
  | 163,  3143         | 385,    XXXI.         |
  |       3158         | 421,    XXXVI.        |
  |       3166         | 225,    312           |
  | 164,  3171-3       |HEADING TO CONTENTS.   |
  |       3174-7       |LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. |
  |       3187         | 366,    XXVII.        |
  |       3189         | 431,    XXXVIII.      |
  |       3193         | 227,    312           |
  | 165,  3224         | 453,    XLII.         |
  | 166,  3229         | 497,    LII.          |
  |       3233         | 291,    363           |
  |       3248         |  21,     36           |
  |       3249         |  31,     37           |
  | 166,  3252         | 388,    XXXI.         |
  |       3258         |   7,     25           |
  | 168,  3273         |   3_a_,  23           |
  |       3278         |   3_b_,  23, 369      |
  | PLATE 169          | PLATE X.              |
  | PLATE 170          | PLATE XI. A.          |
  | 171,  3290         | 349,    XXIV.         |
  |       3292         | 145,    191           |
  |       3295         | 146,    191           |
  |       3296         | 289,    352           |
  | 172,  3323         | 386,    XXXI.         |
  |       3341         | 405,    XXXIV.        |
  | 173,  3364         | 360,    XXV.          |
  | 174,  3380         | 288,    352           |
  | 175,  3384         | 287,    351           |
  |       3390         | 286,    351           |
  | 176,  3401         | 284,    342           |
  | PLATE 177          | PLATE VII. A.         |
  | PLATE 178          | PLATE VII. B.         |
  | PLATE 180          | PLATE I.              |
  | PLATE 186          | PLATE VI.             |
  | 187,  3407         | 182,    265           |
  |       3415         | 494,    LI.           |
  | 188,  3439         | 207,    294           |
  |       3450         | 114,    160           |
  | 189,  3455         | 173,    258           |
  |       3462         | 283,    341           |
  | 190,  3464         | 374,    XXVIII.       |
  |       3474         |   5,     24, 368      |
  | 191,  3483         | 219,    307           |
  | 192,  3484         | 262,    332           |
  |       3485         | 264,    332           |
  |       3486         | 247,    XVIII.        |
  |       3489         | 256,    330           |
  |       3490         | 269,    333           |
  | 192,  3490_a_      | 243,    XVII.         |
  |       3490_b_      | 244,    XVII.         |
  |       3490_c_      | 245,    XVII.         |
  |       3490_d_      | 246,    XVII.         |
  | 193,  3492         | 257,    330           |
  |       3493         | 258,    330           |
  |       3495_d_      | 259,    330           |
  |       3495_e_      | 260,    330           |
  |       3495         | 218,    302           |
  |       3495_a_      | 218,    302           |
  |       3495_g_      | 267,    332           |
  | 194,  3496         | 273,    334           |
  |       3497_a_      | 274,    334           |
  |       3497_b_      | 275,    334           |
  |       3499         | 263,    332           |
  |       3502         | 252,    330           |
  |       3503         | 253,    330           |
  |       3504_a_      | 261,    331           |
  |       3504_f_      | 254,    330           |
  |       3504_g_      | 255,    330           |
  |       3504_i_      | 272,    334           |
  | 195,  3511         | 285,    350           |
  | 196,  Selection.   | 278,    XX            |
  | 197,  3585         | 270,    334           |
  |       3586         | 271,    334           |
  |       3586_a_      | 236,    XV            |
  | 198,  3587         | 234,    XIV           |
  | 199,  3588         | 235,    XIV           |
  | 200,  3489-94      | 242,    XVII          |
  |       3595         | 250,    XVIII         |
  |       3596         | 251,    XVIII         |
  | 201,  3600         | 265,    332           |
  |       3600_a_      | 266,    332           |
  |       3600_b_      | 268,    332           |
  |       3600_c_      | 249,    XVIII         |
  | 202,  3601         | 281,    337           |
  |       3602         | 238,    XV.           |
  |       3603         | 248,    XVIII.        |
  |       3603_a_      | 237,    XV.           |
  |       3603_b_      | 240,    XVI.          |
  | 203_a_             | 239,    XVI.          |
  | 204                | PLATE II.             |
  | 205                | 276,    XIX.          |
  | 206                | 277,    XIX.          |
  | 208                | 282,    339           |
  | 209                | 279-80, XX.           |
  | 211                | PLATE XII.            |
  | 212                | PLATE XIII.           |
  | 213                | PLAN I.               |
  | 214                | PLAN II.              |
  | 215                | PLAN IV.  347         |
  | 216                | PLAN III. 306         |
  | 217 and last.      |  32, 48.              |

[Illustration: PL. XXI.

SPECIMENS OF WHORLS, &c. DUG UP AT TROY]

[Illustration: PL. XXII.

SPECIMENS OF WHORLS, &c. DUG UP AT TROY]

[Illustration: PL. XXIII.

SPECIMENS OF WHORLS, &c. DUG UP AT TROY]

[Illustration: PL. XXIV.

SPECIMENS OF WHORLS, &c. DUG UP AT TROY]

[Illustration: PL. XXV.

SPECIMENS OF WHORLS, &c. DUG UP AT TROY]

[Illustration: PL. XXVI.

SPECIMENS OF WHORLS, &c. DUG UP AT TROY]

[Illustration: PL. XXVII.

SPECIMENS OF WHORLS, &c. DUG UP AT TROY]

[Illustration: PL. XXVIII.

SPECIMENS OF WHORLS, &c. DUG UP AT TROY]

[Illustration: PL. XXIX.

SPECIMENS OF WHORLS, &c. DUG UP AT TROY]

[Illustration: PL. XXX.

SPECIMENS OF WHORLS, &c. DUG UP AT TROY]

[Illustration: PL. XXXI.

SPECIMENS OF WHORLS, &c. DUG UP AT TROY]

[Illustration: PL. XXXII.

SPECIMENS OF WHORLS, &c. DUG UP AT TROY]

[Illustration: PL. XXXIII.

SPECIMENS OF WHORLS, &c. DUG UP AT TROY]

[Illustration: PL. XXXIV.

SPECIMENS OF WHORLS, &c. DUG UP AT TROY]

[Illustration: PL. XXXV.

SPECIMENS OF WHORLS, &c. DUG UP AT TROY]

[Illustration: PL. XXXVI.

SPECIMENS OF WHORLS, &c. DUG UP AT TROY]

[Illustration: PL. XXXVII.

SPECIMENS OF WHORLS, &c. DUG UP AT TROY]

[Illustration: PL. XXXVIII.

SPECIMENS OF WHORLS, &c. DUG UP AT TROY]

[Illustration: PL. XXXIX.

SPECIMENS OF WHORLS, &c. DUG UP AT TROY]

[Illustration: PL. XL.

SPECIMENS OF WHORLS, &c. DUG UP AT TROY]

[Illustration: PL. XLI.

SPECIMENS OF WHORLS, &c. DUG UP AT TROY]

[Illustration: PL. XLII.

SPECIMENS OF WHORLS, &c. DUG UP AT TROY]

[Illustration: PL. XLIII.

SPECIMENS OF WHORLS, &c. DUG UP AT TROY]

[Illustration: PL. XLIV.

SPECIMENS OF WHORLS, &c. DUG UP AT TROY]

[Illustration: PL. XLV.

SPECIMENS OF WHORLS, &c. DUG UP AT TROY]

[Illustration: PL. XLVI.

SPECIMENS OF WHORLS, &c. DUG UP AT TROY]

[Illustration: PL. XLVII.

SPECIMENS OF WHORLS, &c. DUG UP AT TROY]

[Illustration: PL. XLVIII.

SPECIMENS OF WHORLS, &c. DUG UP AT TROY]

[Illustration: PL. XLIX.

SPECIMENS OF WHORLS, &c. DUG UP AT TROY]

[Illustration: PL. L.

SPECIMENS OF WHORLS, &c. DUG UP AT TROY]

[Illustration: PL. LI.

SPECIMENS OF WHORLS, &c. DUG UP AT TROY]

[Illustration: PL. LII.

SPECIMENS OF WHORLS, &c. DUG UP AT TROY]

       *       *       *       *       *

ALBEMARLE STREET,
FEBRUARY 1875.

MR. MURRAY’S LIST OF NEW WORKS.

THE FOURTH EDITION of the QUARTERLY REVIEW, No. 275. (January 1875.)
8vo. 6_s._

CONTENTS:

   I. THE GREVILLE MEMOIRS.
  II. DOCTRINES OF THE JESUITS.
 III. LIFE OF THE PRINCE CONSORT.
  IV. THE ENGLISH BAR.
   V. FARRAR’S LIFE OF CHRIST.
  VI. FRIENDLY SOCIETIES.
 VII. JUDICIAL INVESTIGATION OF TRUTH.
VIII. SPEECHES OF POPE PIUS IX.

THE THIRD EDITION of the QUARTERLY REVIEW, No. 274. (October, 1874.)
8vo. 6_s._

CONTENTS:

   I. THE JESUITS.
  II. PROVINCIAL TURKEY.
 III. ENGLISH ARCHITECTURE.
  IV. MODERN CULTURE.
   V. THE REPUBLIC OF VENICE.
  VI. BISHOP PATTESON.
 VII. EAST-ANGLIA: ITS STRIKES AND LOCK-OUTS.
VIII. BURROWS’ WORTHIES OF ALL SOULS.
  IX. CRIMINAL STATISTICS.
   X. RITUAL OF THE ENGLISH CHURCH.

THE DIARY OF THE SHAH OF PERSIA, during his TOUR THROUGH EUROPE in 1873.
Translated by J. W. REDHOUSE, F.R.A.S. Third Thousand. With Portrait and
Coloured Title. Crown 8vo. 12_s._

THE LAST JOURNALS OF DAVID LIVINGSTONE IN CENTRAL AFRICA, from 1865 to
his Death. Continued by a Narrative of his last moments and sufferings
by his faithful Servants, Chumah and Susi. Edited by Rev. HORACE WALLER.
8th Thousand. With Portrait, Maps, and Illustrations. 2 vols., 8vo.
28_s._

THE CAUCASUS, PERSIA, AND TURKEY IN ASIA; A JOURNEY to TABREEZ,
KURDISTAN, down the TIGRIS and EUPHRATES to NINEVEH and BABYLON, and
across the DESERT to PALMYRA. By BARON VON MAX THIELMANN. Translated
from the German by CHAS. HENEAGE. 2 vols. Post 8vo.

[_In the Press._

OLD TIMES AND DISTANT PLACES. A Series of Sketches. By ARCHDEACON
SINCLAIR, M.A. Crown 8vo. 9_s._

THE SPEAKER’S COMMENTARY ON THE HOLY BIBLE, EXPLANATORY AND CRITICAL,
with a Revision of the Translation. By Bishops and Clergy of the
Anglican Church. Edited by F. C. COOK, M.A., Canon of Exeter. Vols. I.
to V. Medium 8vo.

THE COMMUNISTIC SOCIETIES OF THE UNITED STATES. From Personal Visits and
Observations; including Detailed Accounts of the Economists, Zoarites,
Shakers, The Amana, Oneida, Bethell, Aurora, Icarian and other existing
Societies; with Particulars of their Religious Creeds, Social Practices,
Numbers, Industries, and Present Condition. By CHARLES NORDHOFF. With 40
Illustrations. 8vo. 15_s._

MEMOIR OF SIR RODERICK I. MURCHISON; With Notices of his Scientific
Contemporaries, and of the Rise and Progress of Palæozoic Geology in
Britain. By ARCHIBALD GEIKIE, F.R.S., Director of the Geological Survey
of Scotland. With Portraits. 2 vols., 8vo.

[_Nearly Ready._

TROY AND ITS REMAINS; A Narrative of Researches and Discoveries on the
Site of Ilium and in the Trojan Plain. By Dr. HENRY SCHLIEMANN.
Translated with the Author’s Sanction and Co-operation. Edited by PHILIP
SMITH, B.A. With Map, Views, and 500 Objects of Antiquity. Royal 8vo.

FOUNDATIONS OF RELIGION IN THE MIND AND HEART OF MAN. By the Right Hon.
SIR JOHN BARNARD BYLES. Post 8vo.

[_In the Press._

A DICTIONARY OF CHRISTIAN ANTIQUITIES. The History, Institutions, and
Antiquities of the Christian Church. By Various Writers. Edited by WM.
SMITH, D.C.L., and Rev. Professor CHEETHAM, M.A. 2 vols. Medium 8vo.

[_Vol. I. in February._

     This work commences at the point at which the DICTIONARY OF THE
     BIBLE leaves off, and gives an account of the Institutions of the
     Christian Church from the time of the Apostles to the age of
     Charlemagne.

LECTURES ON THE EARLY HISTORY OF INSTITUTIONS By Sir HENRY MAINE,
K.C.S.I. 8vo. 12_s._

THE HAWAIIAN ARCHIPELAGO; SIX MONTHS AMONG THE PALM GROVES, CORAL REEFS,
AND VOLCANOES OF THE SANDWICH ISLANDS. By ISABELLA BIRD, Author of “The
Englishwoman in America.” With Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 12_s._

WORSHIP IN THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND. By A. J. B. BERESFORD-HOPE, M.P. 2nd
Edition. 8vo. 9_s._

FRAGMENTARY ILLUSTRATIONS of the HISTORY of the BOOK of COMMON PRAYER,
from Manuscript Sources (Bishop Sanderson and Bishop Wren). Edited by
WILLIAM JACOBSON, D.D., Bishop of Chester. 8vo. 5_s._

A HISTORY OF ARCHITECTURE IN ALL COUNTRIES, from the Earliest Times to
the Present Day. By JAMES FERGUSSON, F.R.S. New and Revised Edition.
With 1600 Illustrations. 4 vols. Medium 8vo. 31_s._ 6_d._ each.

Vols. I. and II.--ANCIENT AND MEDIÆVAL ARCHITECTURE.      [_Ready._
Vol. III.--INDIAN AND EASTERN ARCHITECTURE.        [_In the Press._
Vol. IV.--MODERN ARCHITECTURE.                            [_Ready._

THE SONNET; Its Origin, Structure, and Place in Poetry. With Original
Translations from the Sonnets of DANTE and PETRARCH. With Remarks on the
Art of Translating. By CHARLES TOMLINSON, F.R.S. Post 8vo. 9_s._

THE NICENE AND APOSTLES’ CREEDS; Their Literary History, together with
some Account of the Creed of St. Athanasius. By CANON SWAINSON, D.D.,
Norrisian Professor of Divinity at Cambridge. With Facsimile. 8vo.
16_s._

PERCY’S PRACTICAL METALLURGY. Vol. I. Part I. Introduction--Fuel, Wood,
Peat, Coal, Charcoal, Coke, Refractory Materials, Fireclays, &c. New and
Revised Edition. With Illustrations. 8vo.

ENGLAND AND RUSSIA IN THE EAST. A Series of Papers on the Political and
Geographical Condition of Central Asia. By SIR HENRY RAWLINSON, K.C.B.
With Map. 8vo.

ETCHINGS FROM THE LOIRE AND SOUTH OF FRANCE. With 20 Plates and
Descriptive Text. By ERNEST GEORGE, Architect. Folio. 42_s._

Uniform with the above.

ETCHINGS ON THE MOSEL: A Series of Twenty Plates with Descriptive
Letterpress. By ERNEST GEORGE. Folio. 42_s._

THE LAND OF THE NORTH WIND; or, Travels among the Laplanders and
Samoyedes, and along the Shores of the White Sea. By EDWARD RAE. With
Map and Woodcuts. Post 8vo.

HANDBOOK TO THE ITALIAN SCHOOLS OF PAINTING. Based on the Handbook of
Kugler. Originally edited by SIR CHARLES L. EASTLAKE, R.A. Fourth
Edition. Revised and Remodelled. By LADY EASTLAKE. With 140
Illustrations. 2 vols. Crown 8vo. 30_s._

HANDBOOK TO THE GERMAN, FLEMISH, AND DUTCH SCHOOLS OF PAINTING. Based on
the Handbook of Kugler. Originally Edited by the late Dr. WAAGEN. New
Edition. Revised and partly re-written. By J. A. CROWE. With 60
Illustrations. 2 vols. Crown 8vo. 24_s._

THE BOOK OF MARCO POLO, THE VENETIAN: Concerning the Kingdoms and
Marvels of the East. A new English Version. Edited by COL. YULE, C.B.
Second Edition, revised. With Maps and Illustrations. 2 vols. Medium
8vo. 42_s._

THE DESCENT OF MAN, AND SELECTION IN RELATION TO SEX. By CHARLES DARWIN,
F.R.S. Revised and Cheaper Edition. With 80 Illustrations. Crown 8vo.
9_s._

THE “ROB ROY” ON THE JORDAN, NILE, RED SEA, GENESSARETH, ETC. A Canoe
Cruise in Palestine, Egypt, and the Waters of Damascus. By JOHN
MACGREGOR, M.A. Cheaper Edition. With Maps and Illustrations. Post 8vo.
7_s._ 6_d._

THE STUDENT’S EDITION of AUSTIN’S LECTURES on JURISPRUDENCE; or, the
Philosophy of Positive Law. Compiled from the larger work. By ROBERT
CAMPBELL, of Lincoln’s Inn, Barrister-at-Law. Post 8vo. 12_s._

AN ATLAS of ANCIENT GEOGRAPHY, BIBLICAL and CLASSICAL. To illustrate the
“Dictionary of the Bible” and the “Classical Dictionaries.” Compiled
under the superintendence of Dr. WM. SMITH and Mr. GEORGE GROVE. With
Descriptive Text. Folio. £6 6_s._ half-bound.

THE GNOSTIC HERESIES of the FIRST and SECOND CENTURIES. By the late Dean
MANSEL, D.D., Professor of Ecclesiastical History at Oxford. With a
Sketch of his Life and Character by Lord CARNARVON. Edited by CANON
LIGHTFOOT. 8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._

THE MOON. Considered as a Planet, a World, and a Satellite. By JAMES
NASMYTH, C.E., and JAMES CARPENTER, F.R.A.S. Second Edition. With 24
Illustrations and Woodcuts. 4to. 30_s._

LIVES of the ENGINEERS. From the Earliest Times to the Death of the
Stephensons. With an Account of their Principal Works: comprising a
History of Inland Communication in Britain, and the Invention and
Introduction of the Steam Engine and Locomotive. By SAMUEL SMILES,
Author of “Self-Help.” New and Revised Edition. With 9 Portraits and 340
Illustrations. 5 vols. Crown 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._ each.

CONTAINING:

  I. Embankments and Canals--VERMUYDEN, MYDDELTON, PERRY, BRINDLEY.
 II. Harbours, Lighthouses, and Bridges--SMEATON and RENNIE.
III. History of Roads--METCALFE and TELFORD.
 IV. The Steam Engine--BOULTON and WATT.
  V. The Locomotive--GEORGE and ROBERT STEPHENSON.

*** _Each Volume is complete in itself, and can be had separately._

HORTENSIUS; an Historical Essay on the Office and Duties of an Advocate.
By WILLIAM FORSYTH, M.P. Second Edition. With Illustrations. 8vo. 12_s._

SKETCHES and STUDIES--HISTORICAL and DESCRIPTIVE. By RICHARD J. KING,
B.A., Author of the “Handbooks to the Cathedrals of England.” 8vo.
12_s._

MAETZNER’S ENGLISH GRAMMAR. A Methodical, Analytical, and Historical
Treatise on the Orthography, Prosody, Inflexions, and Syntax of the
English Tongue. Translated. By CLAIR J. GRECE, LL.B. 3 vols. 8vo. 36_s._

HISTORY of the CHRISTIAN CHURCH; from the Apostolic Age to the
Reformation. 1517. By Canon ROBERTSON. New and revised Edition. 8 Vols.
Post 8vo. 6_s._ each.

THE STUDENT’S MANUAL of ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY. A History of the
Christian Church from the Earliest Times to the Eve of the Protestant
Reformation. By PHILIP SMITH, B.A., Author of “The Student’s Old and New
Testament Histories.” Post 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

[_In the Press._

THE BEAUTIES of BYRON: being Selections from Lord Byron’s Poetry and
Prose. By a CLERGYMAN. New Edition. With Portrait. Fcap. 8vo. 3_s._
6_d._

LIFE AND DEATH OF JOHN OF BARNEVELD, Advocate of Holland. Including the
Primary Causes and Movements of “The Thirty Years’ War.” By J. LOTHROP
MOTLEY, D.C.L. With Illustrations. 2 Vols. 8vo. 28_s._

ESSAYS CONTRIBUTED TO THE QUARTERLY REVIEW. By the late SAMUEL
WILBERFORCE, D.D., Bishop of Winchester. 2 vols. 8vo. 21_s._

     CONTENTS:--The Naturalist in Sussex and on the Spey--Darwin’s
     Origin of Species--Essays and Reviews--The Hawaiian Islands--Aids
     to Faith--The Church of England and her Bishops--Dr. Newman’s
     Apologia--Clerical Subscription--The Gallican Church--Royal
     Authorship--The Church and her Curates--Keble’s Biography--The
     Archbishops of the Reformation--East African Slave Trade.

SCHOOL BOARD ARCHITECTURE. Being Practical Remarks on the Planning,
Designing, Building, and Furnishing of Schoolhouses. By E. R. ROBSON,
Architect to the School Board for London. With 300 Illustrations. Medium
8vo. 31_s._ 6_d._

THE PERSONAL LIFE AND MINOR WORKS OF GEORGE GROTE. By MRS. GROTE and
ALEXANDER BAIN, LL.D. With Portraits. 2 vols. 8vo. 26_s._

A BRIEF MEMOIR of the PRINCESS CHARLOTTE of WALES. With Selections from
her Correspondence and other unpublished Papers. By LADY ROSE WEIGALL.
Second Edition. With Portrait. Crown 8vo. 8_s._ 6_d._

HISTORY OF ENGLAND DURING THE REIGN OF QUEEN ANNE UNTIL THE PEACE OF
UTRECHT, 1701-13. By EARL STANHOPE. Library Edition, 8vo., 16_s._;
Cabinet Edition, with Portrait, 2 vols., post 8vo., 10_s._

     This work is designed as a connecting link between the conclusion
     of Lord Macaulay’s History and the commencement of Lord Mahon’s.

A HISTORY OF ENGLAND, from the Peace of Utrecht to the Peace of
Versailles, 1713-83. By LORD MAHON. Library Edition, 7 vols., 8vo.,
93_s._; Cabinet Edition, 7 vols., post 8vo., 35_s._

THE TALMUD AND OTHER LITERARY REMAINS OF THE LATE EMANUEL DEUTSCH. With
a Brief Memoir. 8vo. 12_s._

     CONTENTS:--The Talmud--Islam--Egypt, Ancient and Modern--Hermes
     Trismegistus--Judeo-Arabic Metaphysics--Renan’s “Les Apôtres"--The
     Œcumenical Council--Apostolicæ Sedis--Roman Passion Drama--Semitic
     Palæography, Culture, and Languages--Samaritan Pentateuch--The
     Targums--Book of Jasher--Arabic Poetry.

ROMANO LAVO-LIL; Word-Book of the Romany, or English Gipsy Language;
with many pieces in Gypsy, illustrative of the English Gypsies. By
GEORGE BORROW. Post 8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._

NEW JAPAN; THE LAND OF THE RISING SUN; its Annals and Progress during
the past Twenty Years, recording the remarkable Progress of the Japanese
in Western Civilization. By SAMUEL MOSSMAN. With Map. 8vo. 15_s._

THE ORIGIN AND HISTORY OF THE FIRST OR GRENADIER GUARDS, from Documents
in the State Paper Office, War Office, Horse Guards, Contemporary
History, Regimental Records, &c. By Lieut.-Gen. Sir F. W. HAMILTON,
K.C.B. With Portraits and Illustrations. 3 vols. Medium 8vo. 63_s._

REMINISCENCES OF FORTY YEARS’ SERVICE IN INDIA. Including the Caubul
Disasters and Captivities in Affghanistan and the Punjaub, and a
Narrative of the Mutinies in Rajputana. By Lieut-Gen. Sir GEORGE
LAWRENCE, C.B. Crown 8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._

PERSONAL RECOLLECTIONS, FROM EARLY LIFE TO OLD AGE, of MARY SOMERVILLE.
With Selections from her Correspondence. By HER DAUGHTER. With Portrait.
Fifth Thousand. Crown 8vo. 12_s._

THE LAND OF MOAB. Travels and Discoveries on the East Side of the Dead
Sea and the Jordan. By CANON TRISTRAM, LL.D. Second Edition. With Map
and Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 15_s._

LIVES OF THE CHIEF JUSTICES OF ENGLAND, from the Norman Conquest to the
Death of Lord Tenterden. By Lord CAMPBELL. Third Edition. 4 vols. Crown
8vo. 6_s._ each.

A HISTORY OF THE ANCIENT WORLD, from the Earliest Records to the Fall of
the Western Empire, A.D. 455. By PHILIP SMITH, B.A. Fourth Edition. With
Maps and Plans. 3 vols. 8vo. 31_s._ 6_d._

RECORDS OF THE ROCKS; or, Notes on the Geology, Natural History, and
Antiquities of North and South Wales, Devon, and Cornwall. By Rev. W. S.
SYMONDS, F.G.S. With Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 12_s._

THE NATURALIST IN NICARAGUA; a Narrative of a Residence and Journeys in
the Savannahs and Forests; with Observations on Animals and Plants. By
THOMAS BELT, F.G.S. With Illustrations. Post 8vo. 12_s._

BENEDICITE; or, The Song of the Three Children. Being Illustrations of
the Power, Beneficence, and Design manifested by the Creator in His
Works. By G. CHAPLIN CHILD, M.D. Tenth Thousand. Post 8vo. 6_s._

A HISTORY OF THE ROYAL ARTILLERY. Compiled from the Original Records. By
MAJOR DUNCAN, R.A. Second Edition. With Portraits. 2 vols. 8vo. 30_s._

THE GOTHIC ARCHITECTURE OF ITALY; chiefly in Brick and Marble. Being
Notes of Tours in the North of Italy. By G. E. STREET, R.A. Second
Edition. With 60 Illustrations. Royal 8vo. 26_s._

THE GOTHIC ARCHITECTURE OF SPAIN: from Personal Observations made during
several Journeys. By G. E. STREET, F.S.A. Second Edition. With 100
Illustrations. Medium 8vo. 30_s._

LECTURES ON THE GEOGRAPHY OF GREECE. By Rev. H. P. TOZER, M.A. With Map.
Post 8vo. 9_s._

MEMOIR OF WILLIAM ELLIS, Missionary in the South Seas and Madagascar. By
HIS SON. With Portrait. 8vo. 10_s._ 6_d._

SIGNS AND WONDERS IN THE LAND OF HAM; or, The Ten Plagues of Egypt, with
Ancient and Modern Illustrations. By Rev. T. S. MILLINGTON. With
Woodcuts. Post 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

PERILS IN THE POLAR SEAS; True Stories of Arctic Adventure and
Discovery, for Young Persons. By MRS. CHISHOLM. With Maps and 20
Illustrations. Post 8vo. 6_s._

SELF HELP, With Illustrations of Character, Conduct, and Perseverance.
By SAMUEL SMILES. Small 8vo. 6_s._

CHARACTER. A Companion Volume to “Self Help.” By SAMUEL SMILES. Small
8vo. 6_s._

THE TALE OF FRITHIOF. By ESIAS TEGNER. Translated from the Swedish. By
CAPTAIN H. SPALDING. Post 8vo. 7_s._ 6_d._

JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET.

[Illustration:

The
Plain of Troy.
]

[Illustration:

PLAN OF
ILIUM
THE
GRECIAN COLONY.
]

[Illustration:

RUINS OF TROY.

GENERAL PLAN OF RESEARCHES MADE BY M. SCHLIEMANN
IN 1870, 1871, 1872 AND 1873.

[dotted line] Outer Wall of Lysimachus.
[dotted line] Outer Wall of Troy.
1. Greek Wall.
2. Great Hellenic Construction.
3. Interior Bastion of Lysimachus.
4. Great Tower of Ilium.
5. Trenches for the protection of Archers.
6. Courses of stone in form of seats.
7. Ruins of Palace of Priam and later superincumbent constructions.
8. Trojan constructions erected upon old Trojan houses
 in the depths of the Temple of Minerva.
9. Large jars of earthenware enclosed in the wall.
10. Wall of the Temple of Minerva under Lysimachus.
11. Remains of the same Temple of Minerva.
12. House of two storeys in the basement of the Temple
 anterior to the taking of Troy.
13. Trojan houses.
14. Sacrificial Altar of the Trojan Minerva, with drain
 for carrying away the blood.
15. Inner Cistern of the Temple of Minerva of Lysimachus.
16. Remains of the Wall of the Temple of Minerva under Lysimachus.
17. Remains of Trojan houses.
18. Remains of the Temple of Minerva.
19. Wall constructed of fragments of the columns of the Temple of Minerva.
20. Outer Wall later than Troy.
21. Wall later than Troy.
22. Artificial Mound.
23. Wall of Troy.
24. Trojan houses and later walls built upon them.
25. Wall anterior to Troy.
26. Mosaic anterior to the Epoch of Priam.
27. Wall of Fortification anterior to the time of Troy.
28. Sustaining Wall anterior to Troy.
29. Mound of natural or virgin soil.
30. Hellenic Wall.
31. Excavations of Mr. Frank Calvert.
32. Outer Wall of Troy.
33. Encircling Wall later than Troy.
34. Tower later than Troy.
35. Encircling Wall later than Troy.
36. Hellenic Tower.
37. Scæan Gate, and paved road.
38. Dwelling-house.
39. Lodging for Workpeople.
40. Magazine.
41. Workpeople’s Canteen.
42. Place where the treasure of Priam was found.
]


FOOTNOTES:

[1] See the Appendix, pages 369, 370.

[2] “_Trojanische Alterthümer. Bericht über die Ausgrabungen in Troja_,
von DR. HEINRICH SCHLIEMANN. Leipzig, in Commission bei F. A. Brockhaus,
1874.” It may be convenient to state here, lest the reader should be
disappointed at finding no details of the excavations at Hissarlik in
the first year (1870), that the work of that year was merely preliminary
to the systematic researches of 1871-3. An account of that first year’s
work, and of the arguments which convinced Dr. Schliemann that he must
search for Troy at Hissarlik and no where else, will be found in his
earlier work, “_Ithaque, le Péloponnèse, et Troie_.”

[3] Several misprints and wrong references in the original have been
corrected. For the correction respecting the _débris_ at Jerusalem (note
to p. 218), the Editor is indebted to his friend Mr. George Grove.

[4] The Anglicized form of the word is used as a matter of common sense
and convenience. Dr. Schliemann does the same in German.

[5] See the Letter of Mr. S. Comnos in the _Athenæum_ of August 8th, and
the Answer of Dr. Schliemann in the _Academy_ of November 7th, 1874.

[6] See Mr. Newton’s Report, and the discussion thereupon, in the
_Academy_ of February 14th, 1874, and in the ‘Transactions of the
Society of Antiquaries.'

[7] The _Athenæum_, November 7th, 1874. Some of Mr. Calvert’s
corrections seem of importance, but we have not felt it right to use
them in the absence of the reply which Dr. Schliemann will doubtless
make, as he has done to his other critics.

[8] _Iliad_, II. 486. See the full quotation at p. 346. Professor Max
Müller quotes the same passage in favour of the non-reality of Homer’s
Troy; but surely the κλέος ἀκούομεν implies a positive tradition, and
the οὐδέ τι ἴδμεν confesses ignorance of details only. Are Homer’s
Hellespont, and his Plain of Troy, watered by the Scamander and Simoïs,
also “to be sought rather among the Muses who dwell on Olympus than”
about “the Hill of Hissarlik"?

[9] The excellent dissertation by Dr. Eckenbrecher, to which Schliemann
refers at page 46, has just been republished in a revised edition, “_Die
Lage des Homerischen Troja_, von Dr. GUSTAV VON ECKENBRECHER.” With 2
Maps and a View of Hissarlik, 1875. The Author has purposely kept his
argument in favour of the site at Hissarlik, from Homer and the later
classical writers, distinct from what he distinctly accepts as its
confirmation by Schliemann’s discoveries.

[10] See the remarks on this point in the _Appendix_, p. 364. Lest the
views here indicated should seem to be at variance with the frequent use
of the term “pre-Hellenic” throughout this work, it may be well to
explain, once for all, that “pre-Hellenic” is to be taken as signifying
nothing else than “before the occupation of the site by the people of
the historical Greek Ilium.”

[11] The _Phrygians_ (of which race the Trojans were a branch) are among
the nations mentioned as having held in succession the supremacy at sea
(θαλασσοκρατία).

[12] The evidence of the Egyptian monuments to the power of Troy, and
the bearing of that evidence on the date of the remains at Hissarlik,
are among the subjects which we must refrain from discussing, as both
too large and as yet too imperfectly investigated. It must suffice at
present to refer to the letters by M. FRANÇOIS LENORMANT in the
_Academy_ for March 21st and March 28th, 1874, and to the two articles
in the _Contemporary Review_ for June and July, 1874, which it is
understood that Mr. GLADSTONE is about to republish under the title of
‘_Homer and Egypt_; a Contribution towards determining the Place of
Homer in Chronology.'

[13] Those desirous of pursuing this study from its fountain-head may
consult, besides the works quoted by Dr. Schliemann, SPIEGEL’S ‘Iranian
Antiquities’ (_Eranische Alterthumskunde_, Vols. I. and II., Leipzig,
1871, 1873).

[14] Professor Van Benschoten’s ‘Remarks on Dr. Schliemann’s
Discoveries,’ in the ‘Proceedings of the Sixth Annual Session of the
American Philological Association, held at Hartford, July 1874.’ We have
been pleased to find this testimony, while correcting this sheet for
press, in the _Academy_ for January 9th, 1875.

[15] Had the first conclusions of Haug and Gomperz remained good, we
should have had the very significant evidence that all the inscriptions
were in the nature of dedications or invocations; but of course this
question must now be held in suspense.

[16] See Max Müller’s Review of Schliemann in the _Academy_, Jan. 10th,
1874, p. 39; Schliemann’s Reply, entitled ‘Hera Boöpis and Athené
Glaukopis,’ _Ibid._ Nov. 21st, 1874, p. 563, and Max Müller’s Rejoinder,
_Ibid._ Nov. 24th, p. 585.

[17] On the whole subject of this symbolism see the recent work of
PROFESSOR CONZE on the ‘Figures of Heroes and Gods’ (_Heroen-und
Götter-Gestalten_). He shows that the _symbol_ preceded the _image_, two
things which have been confounded in the discussion. A fuller
illustration may be obtained from the use of _animals_ in the _armorial
devices of the Greeks_, which has been recently discussed by Professor
Curtius in a paper contributed to the Berlin Academy of Science. He
believes that the practice came originally from _Assyria_, so that
_Troy_ would be on the route.

[18] While writing this, we remember (though without the means of
verification at hand) that Niebuhr maintains the same view in his
‘Lectures on Ancient History'; and it is confirmed by the tradition
among the Æolians of the Troad, that Agamemnon was the founder of their
colony (κτίστης).

[19] See the _Academy_, Jan. 9th, 1875.

[20] ‘_Anatolica_; or the Journal of a Visit to some of the ancient
Ruined Cities of Caria, Phrygia, Lycia, and Pisidia. By the Rev. E. J.
DAVIS, H.B.M.'s Consular Chaplain, Alexandria, 1874.’ Page 101.

[21] The _Academy_, Nov. 7th, 1874.

[22] The only exceptions to this description are the two terra-cottas,
Pl. XXI. No. 309, and Pl. XLVIII. No. 484, and the one on Pl. XXIV. No.
349, which links the whorls with the round terra-cottas of the Greek
strata.

[23] The descriptions of the patterns are partly from Dr. Schliemann’s
work, and partly added by the Editor; but the chief part are from M.
Burnouf’s descriptions appended to the original drawings by himself and
his accomplished daughter, from which all, from Plate XXIV. and onwards,
have been engraved. These descriptions are quoted simply for what they
may be worth, as the _speculations_ of so eminent an orientalist. We
have omitted some of them as too speculative. In special cases the
initial (B) is added. The material, colour, and style of work are given
from M. Burnouf’s notes. Those on Plates XXI., XXII., XXIII., are
engraved from the photographs in Schliemann’s Atlas.

[24] D for _double_, denotes a whorl decorated on both sides.

[25] In M. Burnouf’s descriptions the 卐 is called “_le sacrifice_,” or
“_le saint sacrifice_.”

[26] Where the depth is not given, we have been unable to discover the
objects in the Atlas; neither the numbers nor the depths being given on
the drawings.

[27] One of numerous examples showing the workman’s _free hand_; he has
not measured his spaces with any exactness.

[28] This is rather suggestive of a _teetotum_.

[29] An example of one of the rudest attempts at drawing from the
_latest_ pre-Hellenic stratum; some equally rude figures are scratched
on a wall at Pompeii.

[30] This is an example of many cases, in which the pattern may be
viewed quite differently, according as we start from the centre or from
the circumference.

[31] Dr. Schliemann desires us to add that this ship was the “Dorothea”
(Captain Simonsen), owned by the merchants Wachsmuth and Kroog.--{ED.}

[32] Each of these Memoirs forms a chapter of the Translation.

[33] For this remarkable vessel see Chapter XXIII. and Plate XVII.

[34] But a second was found in the stratum above (see the Illustration,
No. 35, at the end of the Introduction).

[35] The word by which Dr. Schliemann usually denotes these curious
objects is _carrousels_, as a translation of _fusaioli_, the term
applied by the Italian antiquaries to the similar objects found in the
marshes about Modena. It is difficult to choose an English word, without
assuming their use on the one hand, or not being specific enough on the
other. _Top_ and _teetotum_ are objectionable on the former grounds, and
_wheel_ is objectionable on both. On the whole, _whorl_ seems most
convenient, and Dr. Schliemann gives his approval to this term. Their
various shapes are shown in the Plates at the end of the volume. Those
in the form of single cones, with flat bases, seem to be what Dr.
Schliemann calls volcanoes (_Vulkans_), the hole representing the
_crater_.--{ED.}

[36] See p. 280.

[37] See the Plan of Greek Ilium (Plan I.).

[38] See the Plan of Dr. Schliemann’s Researches. (Plan II.).

[39] The double form of an outer and inner gate, and the use of πύλαι in
the plural for a city gate, are both far too frequent to justify our
founding an argument merely on the plural form of the Σκαίαι
πύλαι.--{ED.}

[40]

    Νῦν δὲ δὴ Αἰνείαο βίη Τρώεσσιν ἀνάξει,
    Καὶ παίδων παῖδες, τοί κεν μετόπισθε γένωνται.

    “But o’er the Trojans shall Æneas reign,
    And his sons’ sons, through ages yet unborn.”

This is the declaration of Poseidon to the gods, when Æneas was in peril
of his life by the sword of Achilles. (But compare p. 182).--{ED.}

[41] To this statement there are at least some exceptions. See the
Analysis by M. Damour, of Lyon, at the end of the book.--{ED.}

[42] We omit here the Author’s further enumeration of the objects
composing the “King’s Treasure,” as they are fully described on the
occasion of their wonderful discovery (Chapter XXIII.). Meanwhile the
Plate opposite gives a general view of the whole.--{ED.}

[43] Engraved among the lithographic plates at the end of the volume,
Pl. LI., No. 496. Since the publication of Dr. Schliemann’s work, many
of these Trojan inscriptions have been more certainly determined to be
real inscriptions in the _Cyprian syllabic character_, through the
researches of Dr. Martin Haug and Professor Gomperz of Vienna. (See the
Appendix.)--{ED.}

[44] Dr. Schliemann has since pronounced these crown-shaped vessels to
be _covers_ of vases; though they may, he thinks, have been used for
cups as well. One is seen placed on the splendid vase on p. 48.--[ED]

[45] See Plan III., p. 306.

[46] _Iliad_, V. 640-642, where Tlepolemus boasts of his ancestor
Hercules--

    Ὅς ποτε δεῦρ’ ἐλθὼν ἕνεχ’ ἵππων Λαομέδοντος,
    Ἓξ οἴῃς σὺν νηυσὶ καὶ ἀνδράσι παυροτέροισιν,
    Ἰλίου ἐξαλάπαξε πόλιν, χήρωσε δ’ ἀγυιάς.

    “With but six ships, and with a scanty band,
    The horses by Laomedon withheld
    Avenging, he o’erthrew this city, Troy,
    And made her streets a desert.”


[47] This most important key to the archæological evidence collected by
Dr. Schliemann has been preserved in the present translation. The depths
are given in _meters_ for the reasons stated in the Preface.

[48] These objects resemble those from other strata, engraved in Chapter
IV. and subsequently.

[49] Chapter XVI., p. 239; comp. Chap. XV., p. 230, XVII., p. 250, XIX.,
p. 272.

[50] It will be seen, however, from the analysis of M. Damour, that
traces of iron (probably in the state of an ore) are found in one of the
sling-bullets discovered by Dr. Schliemann.--{ED.}

[51] See Plan II. at the end of the volume.

[52] Chapter X.

[53] _Nimbus und Strahlenkranz._

[54] See the Sections on the Plates of Whorls.

[55] For examples of this type see Nos. 337, 340, 341, &c.

[56] See the Illustrations to Chapter II., p. 65.

[57] ‘Le Signe de la Croix,’ pp. 88-89.

[58] See the Sections of Plain Whorls, Pl. XXI., Nos. 436-440.

[59] This statement needs considerable qualification. The notes on M.
Burnouf’s drawings, supplied by Dr. Schliemann for this book, frequently
describe the decorated whorls as worn and rubbed, especially on the
under side and at the point, in some cases “by a circular motion.” All
this strongly favours the hypothesis of their use for spindles.--{ED.}

[60] These restorations are indicated in the engravings by light
shading.

[61] XIII. i., p. 122, Tauchnitz edition.

[62] Strabo, XIII. i., p. 99. See the Map of the Plain of Troy.

[63] XIII. i., p. 103.

[64] ‘Rheinisches Museum,’ Neue Folge, III., s. 573-608.

[65] ‘Jahresbericht über das Gymnasium Fridericianum,’ Schwerin, 1871
und 1872.

[66] ‘Rheinisches Museum,’ Neue Folge, 2. Jahrg., s. 1 fg.

[67] ‘Dissertation on the Topography of the Trojan War.’ Edinburgh,
1822. Second Edition. ‘The Plain of Troy described,’ &c. 1863. Dr.
Schliemann might have added the weighty authority of Mr. Grote, ‘History
of Greece,’ vol. i., chap. xv.--{ED.}

[68] Dr. Émile Burnouf has published a very clear and interesting
account of Dr. Schliemann’s discoveries, in the ‘Revue des Deux Mondes’
for Jan. 1, 1874.--{ED.}

[69] As we call it, _lamp-black_, that is, tolerably pure carbon.--{ED.}

[70] See the Cut No. 1 on p. 15.

[71] These are the vases so often mentioned as having the form of great
champagne glasses (see the Cuts on pp. 85, 158, 166, 171). Dr.
Schliemann also applies the name to the unique boat-shaped vessel of
pure gold found in the Treasure.--{ED.}

[72] If M. Burnouf meant this seriously at the time, it can now only
stand as a curious coincidence, interesting as one example of the
tentative process of this new enquiry. (See the Appendix.)--{ED.}

[73] These indications of a fifth pre-Hellenic settlement, if confirmed
by further investigation, would seem to point to the spread of the
Lydians over western Asia Minor.--ED.

[74] This date refers to Dr. Schliemann’s former opinion, that there
were Byzantine remains at Hissarlik. He now places the final destruction
of Ilium in the fourth century, on the evidence of the latest coins
found there. See pp. 318, 319.--ED.

[75] _Voyage de la Troade_ (3e éd. Paris, 1802).

[76] See Plan I., of Greek Ilium, at the end of the volume.

[77] See the Frontispiece.

[78] See Plan II., of the Excavations, at the end of the volume.

[79] The Turkish _piaster_ is somewhat over twopence English.

[80] Herod. VII. 43.

[81] Strabo, XIII. 1. 8; Arrian, I. 11.; Plutarch, Life of Alexander the
Great, viii.

[82] See Plan II., of the Excavations.

[83] The various forms of the whorls are shown in the lithographed
plates at the end of the volume.

[84] See Plate IV. View of the Northern part of the Plain of Troy.

[85] Homer, _Iliad_, II. 790-794:--

    Ἀγχοῦ δ’ ἱσταμένη προσέφη πόδας ὠκέα Ἶρις·
    Εἴσατο δὲ φθογγὴν υἷϊ Πριάμοιο Πολίτῃ,
    Ὃς Τρώων σκοπὸς ἵζε, ποδωκείῃσι πεποιθὼς,
    Τύμβῳ ἐπ’ ἀκροτάτῳ Αἰσυήταο γέροντος,
    Δέγμενος ὁππότε ναῦφιν ἀφορμηθεῖεν Ἀχαιοί--

    “Swift Iris stood amidst them, and the voice
    Assuming of Polites, Priam’s son,
    The Trojan scout, who, trusting to his speed,
    Was posted on the summit of the mound
    Of ancient Æsyetes, there to watch
    Till from their ships the Grecian troops should march--”


[86] See Plate V., View of the South-eastern part of the Plain of Troy.
The word “perpetual” (_ewigem_) in reference to the snow on Ida is
omitted at the desire of the Author, who has ascertained that the summit
is clear of snow in July and August.--{ED.}

[87] The difference of temperature in the springs seems to have been
disproved afterwards. (See Chapter V., p. 92.)--{ED.}

[88] This work has now been done. See ‘Introduction,’ p. 51.

[89] The ‘Introduction’ has already shown how Dr. Schliemann changed his
opinion as to the magnitude of Troy. Compare also Chapter XXIII. It is
hard to see how the vague poetic language of the passage cited furnishes
any _data_ for the computation in the text.--{ED.}

[90] See the Map.

[91] Lycophron’s _Cassandra_; Virgil’s _Æneid_, III., 302-305; Strabo,
XIII., 1.

[92] For the further and most interesting discoveries which speedily led
Dr. Schliemann to recal this conjecture, and which have affected all
previous theories about the ages of stone and bronze, see the beginning
of Chapter IV.

[93] The stone implements here described are so similar in form to the
better-made objects of the same sort, exhibited in subsequent
illustrations, that it seems superfluous to engrave them here.--{ED.}

[94] This depth of 10 meters, or 33 feet, is that which Dr. Schliemann
came to regard as the _lower_ limit of the ruins of the true heroic
Troy. The depth of 7 meters, or 23 feet, presently mentioned is the
_upper_ limit of the same stratum. (See the Introduction and the later
Memoirs.)--{ED.}

[95] These, like all the objects of copper found at Troy, are coated
with verdigris and malachite. (Letter-press to the Atlas.)

[96] See Plate LI., No. 496. Comp. Chapter IX., p. 138. This is one of
the most important of the inscriptions determined to be such by
Professor Gomperz. It has _six_ characters. (See the Appendix.)

[97] This is given on Plate XXII., No. 326, from the Photograph, and
more accurately from M. Burnouf’s drawing on Plate XLVIII., No. 482. Dr.
Schliemann supposed that it bore an inscription; but he afterwards
recalled the opinion. (See Chapter IX., p. 137.)--[ED.]

[98] These cups, as already observed, are really covers of vases, the
“coronet” being the upper, instead of the under part.--{ED.}

[99] In these the Author afterwards recognized moulds for casting
instruments and ornaments of copper. (See Chapter IX.)--[ED.]

[100] This refers to the _lowest_ of the _strata_, which Dr. Schliemann
long took for the ruins of the Homeric Troy.--[ED.]

[101] A few, however, were afterwards found in lower strata, at 6 and
even 8 meters. (See p. 295.)--[ED.]

[102] See the Frontispiece and Plan II.

[103] Gabriel de Mortillet, _Le Signe de la Croix avant le
Christianisme_.

[104] Plates XXI. to LII. at the end of the volume.

[105] Copied in the _Zeitschrift für Ethnologie, Organ der Berliner
Gesellschaft für Anthropologie und Urgeschichte_, 1871, Heft III.

[106] Émile Burnouf, _La Science des Religions_.

[107] A. W. Franks, _Horæ ferales_, pl. 30, fig. 19.

[108] The cut, for which we are indebted to Mr. Fergusson, represents
the foot-print of Buddha, as carved on the Amraverti Tope, near the
river Kistna. Besides the _suastika_, repeated again and again on the
heels, the cushions, and the toes, it bears the emblem of the _mystic
rose_, likewise frequently repeated (comp. the lithographed whorls, Nos.
330, 339, &c.), and the central circles show a close resemblance to some
of the Trojan whorls.--{ED.}

[109] See an illustration to Chapter X. for similar ivories, still more
interesting, from their greater depth, than those mentioned in the text,
which are very imperfectly shown on the original photograph.

[110] See the Plate of Idols, p. 36.

[111] See Cut, No. 13, p. 35.

[112] Dr. Schliemann is here speaking of the “cups” which he afterwards
decided to be _covers_, which of course represent only the _head_, the
_body_ being on the vase.--{ED.}

[113] See Cut, No. 54, p. 86.

[114] _Ithaque, le Péloponnèse et Troie._ Dr. Schliemann’s subsequent
change of opinion on this point is explained in subsequent chapters, and
in the Introduction.

[115] The various types of whorls spoken of here and throughout the work
are delineated in the lithographic Plates at the end of the volume, and
are described in the List of Illustrations.

[116] These “rising suns” are the arcs with their ends resting on the
circumference of the whorl, as in Nos. 321-28, and many others on the
Plates. M. Burnouf describes them as “stations of the sun.”

[117] For the type of whorls with “sôma-trees” or “trees of life” (four,
or more, or fewer), see Nos. 398, 400, 401, 404, &c. In No. 410 the four
trees form a cross.

[118] Plate LII., No. 498.

[119] This falcon seems to be represented by rude two-legged figures on
some of the whorls:--_e. g._ on Plate XLV., No. 468 (comp. p. 135).

[120] _Abhandlungen der K. bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften_,
1846, S. 127.

[121] A. Kuhn, ‘Herabkunft des Feuers.'

[122] _Geschichte der Kunst._

[123] See the cut No. 75 and also on Plate XXX., No. 382. M. Burnouf
describes the animal to the right as a _hare_, the symbol of the Moon,
and the other two as the _antelopes_, which denote the prevailing of the
two halves of the month (_quinzaines_).

[124] See Plate XXXV., No. 414. The same symbol is seen on several other
examples.

[125] _Iliad_, XIV. 346-351. An English writer ought surely to use our
old-fashioned form _Jove_, which is also even philologically preferable
as the stem common to Ζεύς and _Ju_-piter (Διο = Ζεϝ = _Jov_), rather
than the somewhat pedantically sounding Ζεύς.--{ED.}

[126] _Essays_, II. 93.

[127] _Iliad_, XX. 216-218:--

    Κτίσσε δὲ Δαρδανίην· ἐπεὶ οὔπω Ἴλιος ἱρὴ Ἐν πεδίῳ πεπόλιστο,
    πόλις μερόπων ἀνθρώπων, Ἀλλ’ ἔθ’ ὑπωρείας ᾤκεον πολυπίδακος Ἴδης.

    “By Dardanus, of cloud-compelling Jove Begotten, was Dardania peopled
    first, Ere sacred Ilion, populous city of men, Was founded on the
    plain; as yet they dwelt On spring-abounding Ida’s lowest spurs.”

[128] See Plate XXII., No. 327.

[129] _Essays_, II. 324.

[130] _Herabkunft des Feuers_, p. 59.

[131] See, for example, _Iliad_, XI. 633-635, _Odyssey_, XV. 116, 446.

[132] Dr. Schliemann found afterwards that these fragments did not
belong to double cups. (See Chap. XXII., p. 313, and ‘Introduction,’ p.
15.)

[133] As the device on a seal may be presumed to be significant, and as
patterns strikingly similar to this occur on some of the whorls (_e.g._
on Plate XLIV., No. 461), we have a strong argument for the significance
of the latter class of devices.--{ED.}

[134] See Plate XXII., No. 321.

[135] That is, belonging to the lowest stratum.

[136] Chapter VII., p. 121.

[137] See No. 380, on Plate XXIX.

[138] See No. 383, on Plate XXX.

[139] Plate XXIX., No. 379. The front bears 4 卐; on the back are the
emblems described, which are shown separately in detail, and of which M.
Burnouf gives an elaborate description. (See List of Illustrations.)

[140] Plate XXVIII., No. 377; compare Plate XXVII., No. 367.

[141] See Plate XXII., No. 328; the _depth_ (14 M.) deserves special
notice. The _wheel-shape_, which is characteristic of the whorls in the
lowest stratum, is seen at No. 314, Plate XXI.

[142] Chapter IV., p. 84. See Plate XXII., No. 326, from the Atlas of
Photographs, and Plate XLVIII., No. 482, from M. Burnouf’s drawings.

[143] Plate XXX., No. 383.

[144] Page 83, and Plate LI., No. 496. This is one of the inscriptions
examined by Professor Gomperz. (See Appendix.)

[145] See Cut, No. 81, and Plate XXVII., No. 369. The latter is an
inscription, which Professor Gomperz has discussed. (See Appendix.)

[146] Iliad, VI. 168-170:--

    Πέμπε δέ μιν Λυκίηνδε, πόρεν δ’ ὅ γε σήματα λυγρά,
    Γράψας ἐν πίνακι πτυκτῷ θυμοφθόρα πολλά,
    Δεῖξαι δ’ ἠνώγειν ᾧ πενθερῷ ὄφρ’ ἀπόλοιτο.

    “But to the father of his wife, the King
     Of Lycia, sent him forth, with tokens charged
     Of dire import, on folded tablets traced,
     Which, to the monarch shown, might work his death.”


[147] Chapter IV., pp. 83-84. Though not Phœnician, these are Cyprian
letters, and they have been discussed by Professor Gomperz, who found in
this very whorl his _experimentum crucis_. (See Appendix.)

[148] Chapter IV., p. 87.

[149] Some examples of these jars, still more interesting on account of
the great depth at which they were found, are seen in Plate XI., p. 290.

[150] Chapter VIII.

[151] For a further description and discussion of this splendid relief,
see the Introduction, pp. 32-34. An acute critic has suggested to us
that the metopé is a sculpture of the best age of Greek art, before or
about the time of Alexander, inserted in a Doric frieze of late debased
work, as is proved by the difference of styles, and by the evident fact
that the metopé was originally too large for the space between the
triglyphs. The temple to which it belonged, in Dr. Schliemann’s final
opinion, was a temple of Apollo, which he discovered later (comp. Chap.
XIV., p. 223, and Chap. XVII., p. 257).--{ED.}

[152] Iliad, VI. 302-304:--

    Ἡ δ’ ἄρα πέπλον ἑλοῦσα Θεανὼ καλλιπάρῃος
    Θῆκεν Ἀθηναίης ἐπὶ γούνασιν ἠϋκόμοιο,
    Εὐχομένη δ’ ἠρᾶτο Διὸς κούρῃ μεγάλοιο.

    “But fair Theano took the robe and placed
    On Pallas’ knees, and to the heavenly maid,
    Daughter of Jove, she thus addressed her prayer.”


[153] The reader should bear in mind that Dr. Schliemann finally came
back to this opinion. It is not “_second_ thoughts” (say the authors of
‘Guesses at Truth'), but _first_ and _third_ thoughts, that are
“best."--{ED.}

[154] Compare the sections shown on Plate XXI.

[155] See No. 14, on page 36.

[156] At the end of the volume, pp. 359, 360.

[157] Dr. Schliemann afterwards pronounced these “wedges” to be
battle-axes. See Introduction, p. 21.

[158] Here, as well as in what goes before, Dr. Schliemann writes on the
supposition, which he afterwards abandoned, that the remains in the
lowest stratum are those of the Trojans of the Iliad.--{ED.}

[159] We believe that naturalists are now agreed that such appearances
of toads imprisoned for long periods are deceptive. Into what depths
cannot a tadpole (whether literal or metaphorical) wriggle himself
down?--{ED.}

[160] This description itself suggests an inversion of the so-called
“cup,” which is, in fact, a vase-cover. For its form see No. 74, on p.
115.--{ED.}

[161] See Plate XXIII., No. 339; Plate XLVII., No. 478.

[162] According to Dr. Schliemann’s later view these “successors to the
Trojans” were, as we have seen, the Trojans themselves.--{ED.}

[163]The drawing, Plate XLVII., No. 480, shows the sign 20 times in 5
groups of 4 each. This seems to be a similar type to the one described,
but from a lesser depth.--[_Ed._]

[164] The inscription, which Professor Gomperz has pointed out, is
identical with that on Pl. LI., No. 496. (See pp. 83-84 and
Appendix.)--{ED.}

[165] The types here described will be found on the Lithographs.

[166] Similar jewels are depicted among the articles of the Treasure
(Chapter XXIII., Plate XX.).

[167] Chapter IX., pp. 132-3.

[168] See Plate LI., No. 493. M. Burnouf’s drawings, from which our
engraving is taken, seem to differ from Dr. Schliemann’s description in
a few of the minuter details.--{ED.}

[169] On Plate I., No. 491, this ball is represented from M. Burnouf’s
drawings, showing six different faces.

[170] See No. 5, p. 24.--{ED.} Perhaps they were used to polish the
terra-cotta vases.

[171] See No. 13, p. 35.

[172] Compare these with Cut No. 74 on p. 115.

[173] See Plate XLVIII., No. 484.

[174] We do not feel it right to spoil the unity of the following
disquisition by striking out the few repetitions of arguments urged in
other parts of the work.--{ED.}

[175] Strabo, XIII. i. p. 103; Lycophron, _Cassandra_, 1208. See
further, on the Simoïs, Note A, p. 358.

[176] _Odyssey_, XXIV. 80-81:

    Ἀμφ’ αὐτοῖσι δ’ ἔπειτα μέγαν καὶ ἀμύμονα τύμβον
    Χεύαμεν Ἀργείων ἱερὸς στρατὸς αἰχμητάων,
    Ἀκτῇ ἐπὶ προυχούσῃ, ἐπὶ πλατεῖ Ἑλλησπόντῳ,
    Ὥς κεν τηλεφανὴς ἐκ ποντόφιν ἀνδράσιν εἴη
    Τοῖς, οἳ νῦν γεγάασι, καὶ οἳ μετόπισθεν ἔσονται.

“We the holy army of the spear-throwing Argives, then raised round these
(bones) a great and honourable tomb on the projecting shore of the broad
Hellespont, so that it might be seen from the sea by the men who are now
born and who shall be hereafter."--Dr. Schliemann’s translation.

[177] Strabo, XIII. 1.

[178] Plutarch, ‘Life of Alexander the Great'; Cicero, pro Archia, 10;
Ælian, _V. H._, 12, 7.

[179] Dio Cassius, LXXVII.

[180] _Iliad_, XX. 215-218.

[181] Herodotus, I. 27; _Iliad_, III. 189-190; Strabo, XIII. 3.

[182] But see further on this point, Chapter XI., pp. 197-8.--{ED.}

[183] _Iliad_, XX. 307-308, quoted in the Introduction, p. 19.

[184] See the Plates of Whorls, Nos. 350, 351, 352, 356, 357, 359, &c.

[185] Plate XXVI., No. 362. M. Burnouf calls these “the 6 bi-monthly
sacrifices.”

[186] Plate XXXIII., No. 402.

[187] Plate XXXIV., No. 403.

[188] Plate XXII., No. 320.

[189] See the Sections on Plate XXI.

[190] In the ball here depicted there is no mistaking the significance
of the line of 卐, the symbols of fire, as denoting the torrid zone. The
three dots are, according to M. Burnouf, the symbol of royal majesty
therein residing. The two rows of dots parallel to the torrid zone may
possibly represent the inhabited regions of the temperate zones,
according to the oriental theory followed by Plato.--{ED.}

[191] See the qualification of this statement on p. 40.

[192] In the Atlas, Dr. Schliemann describes this and another such as
Trojan lamps, but adds that they may be only vase covers.

[193] The one meant seems to be that engraved on p. 115 (No. 74).

[194] See Cut, No. 149, p. 199.

[195] See Cut, No. 1, p. 15.

[196] _Iliad_, XXII. 145-156:--

            Οἱ δὲ παρὰ σκοπιὴν καὶ ἐρινεὸν ἠνεμόεντα
            Τείχεος αἰὲν ὑπὲκ κατ’ ἀμαξιτὸν ἐσσεύοντο,
            Κρουνὼ δ’ ἵκανον καλλιρρόω, ἔνθα τε πηγαὶ
            Δοιαὶ ἀναΐσσουσι Σκαμάνδρου δινήεντος.
            Ἡ μὲν γάρ θ’ ὕδατι λιαρῷ ῥέει, ἀμφὶ δὲ καπνὸς
            Γίγνεται ἐξ αὐτῆς ὡς εἰ πυρὸς αἰθομένοιο·
            Ἡ δ’ ἑτέρη θέρεϊ προρέει ἐϊκυῖα χαλάζῃ
            Ἢ χιόνι ψυχρῇ ἢ ἐξ ὕδατος κρυστάλλῳ.
            Ἔνθα δ’ ἐπ’ αὐτάων πλυνοὶ εὐρέες ἐγγὺς ἔασιν
            Καλοὶ λαΐνεοι, ὅθι εἵματα σιγαλόεντα
            Πλύνεσκον Τρώων ἄλοχοι καλαί τε θύγατρες
            Τὸ πρὶν ἐπ’ εἰρήνης, πρὶν ἐλθεῖν υἷας Ἀχαιῶν.


            “They” (Hector and Achilles, in flight and pursuit)
            “They by the watch-tower, and beneath the wall
            Where stood the wind-beat fig-tree, raced amain
            Along the public road, until they reached
            The fairly-flowing founts, whence issued forth,
            From double source, Scamander’s eddying streams.
            One with hot current flows, and from beneath,
            As from a furnace, clouds of steam arise;
            ‘Mid Summer’s heat the other rises cold
            As hail, or snow, or water crystallized;
            Beside the fountains stood the washing-troughs
            Of well-wrought stone, where erst the wives of Troy
            And daughters fair their choicest garments washed,
            In peaceful times, ere came the sons of Greece.”

[197] See _Iliad_, II. 811-815, quoted above, p. 179.

[198] Chapter II., p. 69.

[199] See Plan II.

[200] _Iliad_, VII. 452-453.

[201] The Tower is marked No. 4, and is also named, on Plan II.

[202] This opinion was changed afterwards. See Chapter XXII., p. 318.--{ED.}

[203] _Iliad_, VI. 386, 387:--

    Ἀλλ’ ἐπὶ πύργον ἔβη μέγαν Ἰλίου, οὕνεκ’ ἄκουσεν
    Τείρεσθαι Τρῶας, μέγα δὲ κράτος εἶναι Ἀχαιῶν.

    “But to the height of Ilion’s topmost tower
    Andromache is gone; since tidings came
    The Trojan force was overmatched, and great
    The Grecian strength.”

[204] Similar rings are shown among the articles of the Treasure
(Chapter XXIII., Plate XX).

[205] Others, even more interesting, were found later (Chapter XX., pp.
279-80).

[206] This last name was afterwards recalled by Dr. Schliemann, and that
of “Ilium” or “Troy” confined to the Hill of Hissarlik. See Chapter
XXIII., p. 343; and Introduction, p. 18.

[207] Respecting these steps, which are marked No. 6, on Plan II., and c
on Plan III., p. 306, see further in Chapter XXII., p. 318, where the
idea of an upper storey is rejected.--{ED.}

[208] The cut represents a vase of this type, with the upper part joined
on by Dr. Schliemann, who remarks that it is doubtful whether the owl’s
face belongs to this vase, as the Ilian goddess is in no other case
represented on vases without the breasts and abdomen. (Description in
the Atlas of Photographs.)

[209] See Plate XXI., No. 309.

[210] According to Mr. Gladstone’s theory, these masses of masonry, and
the tradition ascribing them to Poseidon and Apollo, are signs of
Phœnician influence.--{ED.}

[211] This statement is hardly accurate. The greatest depth of _débris_
discovered by the officers of the Palestine Exploration Fund at
Jerusalem was not in the valleys, but on the Eastern slope of Mount
Moriah. The accumulation reached from the foot of the wall down the
slope to the bed of the Kedron, and beyond it some distance up the slope
of the Mount of Olives. The usual depth at the wall was 60 or 70 feet,
but at the north end it reached as much as 120, owing to the descent of
the original ground at that spot. The masons’ marks on the lowest
courses of the stones, reached by sinking shafts through these great
depths, seemed to show a date nearer that of Solomon than of
Titus.--{ED.}

[212] We leave this, like other such passages, as landmarks of the rapid
progress made in the discoveries opened up by Dr. Schliemann.--{ED.}

[213] _Iliad_, VII. 83 and IV. 508.; see pp. 145-6, 257.

[214] See note ([+]), p. 218.

[215] This recals to mind Homer’s frequent mention of the blasts of
Boreas.--{ED.}

[216] See Cut, No. 9, p. 27.

[217] Dr. Schliemann afterwards assigned these Corinthian pillars to the
time of Constantine. (See Chapter XXII., p. 320, and Introduction, p.
30.--{ED.})

[218] Strabo, XIII., pp. 100, 101, Tauchnitz edition.

[219] Velleius Paterculus, II. 102.

[220] See Cut, No. 13, p. 35.

[221] The serpents’ heads, found so frequently among the ruins of Troy,
cannot but recal to mind the superstitious regard of Homer’s Trojans for
the reptile as a symbol, and their terror when a half-killed serpent was
dropped by the bird of Jove amidst their ranks (_Iliad_, XII. 208,
209):--

    Τρῶες δ’ ἐρρίγησαν, ὅπως ἴδον αἰόλον ὄφιν
    Κείμενον ἐν μέσσοισι, Διὸς τέρας αἰγιόχοιο.

    “The Trojans, shuddering, in their midst beheld
    _The spotted serpent_, dire portent of Jove.”


[222] That is, in the strata of the _third_ dwellers on the hill.

[223] sic

[224] sic.

[225] sic.

[226] _Archæological Journal_, vol. xxi. 1864.

[227] _Die Ausgrabungen auf der homerischen Pergamos_, s. 24.

[228] sic.

[229] sic.

[230] sic

[231] Compare Homer’s picture of the marshalling of the Greek forces:
_Iliad_, II. 467-8:--

    Ἔσταν δ’ ἐν λειμῶνι Σcαμανδρίῳ ἀνθεμόεντι
    Μυρίοι, ὅσσα τε φύλλα καὶ ἄνθεα γίγνεται ὥρῃ.

    “Upon _Scamander’s flowery mead_ they stood
    Unnumbered as _the vernal leaves and flowers_."--{ED.}


[232] Plutarch, _Life of Alexander_, viii. Comp. p. 146.

[233] As elsewhere, the wedges here spoken of are what the Author
afterwards decided to be axes, and especially battle-axes.--{ED.}

[234] An engraving of a similar mould, found on the Tower, is given in
Chapter XVIII., No. 175. p. 261.

[235] It is perhaps unnecessary to remind the reader again how the
Author afterwards gave up the idea of this distinction between the city
and its Pergamus.--{ED.}

[236] A handle such as this, or as that shown at p. 260 (No. 174), seems
well suited for the long _leaning-staff_ (σκῆπτρον, from σκήπτομαι, “to
lean upon”) which, in Homer, is the symbol of royal authority, and with
which Ulysses beat Thersites. (_Iliad_, II. 46, 265, _et
passim_.)--{ED.}

[237] See a similar example in Chapter XX., p. 286.

[238] Plate XXXIV., No. 404.

[239] See p. 65.

[240] May they have been for flaying the sacrificed animals, a sharp
flint being better for this purpose than a copper knife, and perhaps
also being preferred to metal as less contaminated by human
labour?--{ED.}

[241] _Iliad_, XII. 445-462.

[242] _Iliad_, V. 302-310.

[243] Nor are even these now considered to be Byzantine; see Chapter
XXII., p. 320, and Introduction, p. 30.--[ED.]

[244] Homer’s _Iliad_, III. 362; IV. 459; VI. 9; XIII. 132; XVI. 216.

[245] Few coincidences have struck us more than the comparison of these
helmet-crests with the frequent allusions in Homer, especially where
“Hector of the dancing helmet-crest” (κορυθαίολος Ἕκτωρ), takes off the
helmet that frightened his child (_Iliad_, VI. 469, foll.):--

    Ταρβήσας χαλκόν τε ἰδὲ λόφον ἱππιοχαίτην
    Δεινὸν ἀπ' ἀκροτάτης κόρυθος νεύοντα νοήσας.

    "Scared by the brazen helm and horse-hair plume,
    That nodded, fearful, on the warrior's crest."


No such plumed helmets are found among the remains of “pre-historic”
barbarous races. The skeletons, with the helmets and lances beside them,
bear striking witness to a city taken by storm. In Homer, the Trojans
under the command of “the crested Hector” are “valiant with lances”
(μεμαότες ἐγχείῃσιν, _Iliad_, II. 816-818).--{ED.}

[246] Compare Plan II. with the whole of the following description.

[247] See Plate XI.B. Six of the jars are shown, and a seventh (broken)
lies outside of the cut to the right. The two largest of all are out of
view, on the other side of the wall of the magazine, but one of them is
seen in the view on Plate XI.A, in the left-hand bottom corner.

[248] See No. 29, p. 36.

[249] No. 207, p. 294.

[250] No. 208, p. 294. Respecting such an impersonation of the goddess
Hera, see pp. 113, 114, 353.

[251] No. 209, on this page.

[252] Strabo, XIII. p. 589.

[253] Strabo, XIII. p. 609.

[254] Plutarch, _Life of Lucullus_.

[255] _Hist. Nat._, XXXV. 12, s. 55.

[256] Waddington, _Fastes des Provinces Asiatiques de l’Empire Romain_.
Paris, 1872, pp. 43-44.

[257] Pape-Benseler, _Lexikon der Eigennamen_.

[258] It will be seen presently that Dr. Schliemann ultimately limited
the ancient city of Troy to the “Pergamus” itself.--{ED.}

[259] _Iliad_, III. 146-244:--

    “Attending there on aged Priam, sat
    The Elders of the city; ....
    All these were gathered at the Scæan Gates.
    ... so on Ilion’s Tower
    Sat the sage chiefs and councillors of Troy.
    Helen they saw, as to the Tower she came.”


[260] Iliad, VI. 390-393:--

    Ἦ ῥα γυνὴ ταμίη· ὁ δ’ ἀπέσσυτο δώματος Ἕκτωρ
    Τὴν αὐτὴν ὁδὸν αὖτις ἐϋκτιμένας κατ’ ἀγυιὰς.
    Εὖτε πύλας ἵκανε διερχόμενος μέγα ἄστυ
    Σκαιάς, τῇ γὰρ ἔμελλε διεξίμεναι πεδίονδε----

    “So spoke the ancient dame; and Hector straight
    Through the wide streets his rapid steps retraced.
    But when at last the mighty city’s length
    Was traversed, and the Scæan Gates were reached,
    Whence was the outlet to the plain----”


[261] This edifice, now first laid open from beneath the ashes which
covered it in the burning of the city, was found by Dr. Schliemann in
the very state to which, in Homer, Agamemnon threatens to reduce it:
“The house of Priam _blackened with fire_” (Iliad, II. 414, 415):

    Πρίν με κατὰ πρηνὲς βαλέειν
    Πριάμοιο μέλαθρον Αἰθαλόεν, πρῆσαι δὲ πυρὸς δηΐοιο θύρετρα.



[262] In the letter-press to the Atlas of Photographs this object is
described as “a brilliant dark-red Vase, 62 centimeters (above 2 feet)
high, with the owl-face of Troy’s tutelar goddess, her two breasts, a
necklace, and a royal scarf round the whole body. It is remarkable that
this vase has not the two uplifted arms of the goddess, which are
wanting in no other case, and that it has only two handles.”

[263] The Inscription on this Vase has been discussed by Professor
Gomperz, who also pronounces the characters on it as well as on the
other vase (No. 221) to be Cyprian writing. (See Appendix.)

[264] Compare the Introduction, p. 50.

[265] See Cut, No. 54, p. 87.

[266] This most curious vase is engraved in the Introduction, No. 31, p.
37.

[267] See the passage quoted below to illustrate the shield found among
the Treasure (Chapter XXIII., p. 324).

[268] See the illustration, No. 7, p. 25.

[269] This looks very much like the signet-cylinders of the Assyrian and
Babylonian kings.--{ED.}

[270] This is drawn as a _whorl_, and is so called by Dr. Schliemann in
a letter, informing us that it is found to bear an Inscription. It is
not described in the letter-press to the Photographs.--{ED.}

[271] Thus Hephæstus places a δέπας ἀμφικύπελλον in the hand of his
mother, Hera, and she takes it from his hand (Homer’s _Iliad_, I. 584-5,
596).--{ED.}

[272] See the Cuts placed as headings to the “Table of Contents,” and
“List of Illustrations.”

[273] See Plan II., and Plan III. on p. 306, at the mark _b_.

[274] See Plan II., and _c_ on Plan III., p. 306. Compare p. 213.

[275] See the spot marked on Plan II. No. 42, and Plate XIII. _a_.

[276] The articles belonging to the Treasure are partly engraved on
seven separate Plates (XIV.--XX.), and partly marked with TR. in the
cuts. They were found at a depth of 8½ meters, nearly 28 feet. The
_General View of the Treasure_ (Plate III., opposite p. 22) shows a few
objects which are either so like others, or so insignificant, as not to
need a separate delineation.

[277] See Plate XIV., No. 234. This round shield of copper (or bronze?),
with its central boss, and the furrow and rim so suitable for holding
together a covering of ox-hides, reminds us irresistibly of the
seven-fold shield of Ajax:--_Iliad_, VII. 219-223 (cf. 245-247):--

    Αἴας δ’ ἐγγύθεν ἦλθε φέρων σάκος ἠΰτε πύργον,
    Χάλκεον ἑπταβόειον, ὅ οἱ Τυχίος κάμε τεύχων,
    Σκυτοτόμων ὄχ’ ἄριστος, Ὕλῃ ἔνι οἰκία ναίων,
    Ὅς οἱ ἐποίησεν σάκος αἰόλον ἑπταβόειον,
    Ταύρων ζατρεφέων, ἐπὶ δ’ ὄγδοον ἤλασε χαλκόν.

    “Ajax approached; before him, as a tower,
    His mighty shield he bore, seven-fold, brass-bound,
    The work of Tychius, best artificer
    That wrought in leather; he in Hyla dwelt.
    Of seven-fold hides the ponderous shield was wrought
    Of lusty bulls: the eighth was glittering brass.”

It is equally striking to compare the shield of the Treasure with the
description of Sarpedon’s shield, with its round plate of hammered
copper (or bronze), and its covering of ox-hides, fastened to the inner
edge of the rim by gold wires or rivets (_Iliad_, XII. 294-297):--

    Αὐτίκα δ’ ἀσπίδα μὲν πρόσθ’ ἔσχετο πάντοσ’ ἐΐσην
    Καλὴν χαλκείην ἐξήλατον, ἣν ἄρα χαλκεὺς
    Ἤλασεν, ἔντοσθεν δὲ βοείας ῥάψε θαμειὰς
    Χρυσείῃς ῥάβδοισι διηνέκεσιν περὶ κύκλον.


    “His shield’s broad _orb_ before his breast he bore,
    Well wrought, _of beaten brass_, which the armourer’s hand
    Had beaten out, and lined with stout bull’s hide
    With golden rods, continuous, all around."--{ED.}


[278] See Plate XIV., No. 235. In the Iliad the λέβης is used almost
always as a caldron, and is often given as a prize at games; in the
Odyssey it is always used for washing the hands or feet. This one shows
the marks of a fearful conflagration, and near the left handle are seen
two fragments of copper weapons (a lance and a battle-axe) firmly molten
on. (Description to the Atlas of Photographs.)

[279] See Plate XV., No. 236. This remarkable object lay at the top of
the whole mass, and Dr. Schliemann supposes it to have formed a hasp to
the lid of the wooden chest in which the Treasure was packed.
(Description in Atlas.)

[280] These vessels of gold are shown on Plate XV., Nos. 237, 238.

[281] Plate XVI., Nos. 239, 240.

[282] Or, as suggested in the ‘Quarterly Review’ for April 1874, a
person, holding the cup before him by the two handles, may have poured a
libation from the further spout and then have drunk out of the nearer.
Thus Achilles used a choice goblet (δέπας) for drinking wine and pouring
libations to the gods. (_Iliad_, XVI., 225-228.)

We are indebted to Mr. J. W. Lockhart for the following account of a
double-spouted boat-shaped bronze vessel, used in a similar manner in
the Chinese temples:--“In China there is a vessel of very nearly the
same shape, but with ears prolonged till they rise an inch above the
cup: the cup stands on three legs and is, in fact, a tripod. Such cups
are used in the temples, especially in the ancestral temples of the real
religion of China, when offerings are made to the _manes_ of ancestors.
The cups are filled with wine, when placed on the altar before the idol
shrine, or before the ancestral tablet; and the wine is afterwards
partly drunk and partly poured out as a libation.” Such vessels are used
in pairs, and our drawing is made from one of a pair in Mr. Lockhart’s
possession. It is of _bronze_, 6 inches long, and 6½ inches high,
including the legs. The width is 2 inches between the upright ears, and
2-3/8 inches at the broadest part. There is only _one_ handle. Mr.
Lockhart calls attention to the “key” ornament round the cup, which is
so well known in the purest Greek art, as a sign of Chinese influence on
the art of Western Asia and Europe. Mr. Lockhart also reads Chinese
characters on some of the Trojan whorls. We are under a deep obligation
to Mr. Lockhart for his spontaneous offer of this very interesting
illustration of one of the most striking and (as we before supposed)
_unique_ objects discovered by Dr. Schliemann.--{ED.}

[283] Plate XVIII., No. 248.

[284] See Plate XVII., No. 242.

[285] The two largest weigh, respectively, a little over and a little
under 6 oz., and the other four are all a little over 5½ oz., troy.
The _gramme_ is 15·43235 grains, that is, a little less than 15½
grains.

[286] _Iliad_, XXIII. 262-270 (cf. vv. 612-616). The passage furnishes
other striking parallels to Dr. Schliemann’s discoveries. The _tripod
with ears containing 22 measures_, which is added to the woman for the
first prize (καὶ τρίποδ’ ὠτώεντα δυωκαιεικοσίμετρον) calls to mind the
vessel from the Trojan stratum, No. 199, p. 285. The _fifth_ prize is a
_double-handled flat cup (or dish) untouched by fire_, i. e. wrought
with the hammer (ἀμφίθετον φιάλην ἀπύρωτον ἔθηκεν). The _metal_ is not
specified, but its coming next to the two _gold talents_ suggests
_silver_, and Dr. Schliemann found silver φιάλαι with side-rings in the
Treasure and the Palace. The passage seems to confirm Schliemann’s
interpretation of δέπας ἀμφικύπελλον, for what sort of a vessel can we
conceive of as a double dish joined bottom to bottom? We know
side-dishes with their covers can be used as two dishes, but what would
be the use of joining them? Aristarchus, indeed, explained ἀμφίθετος as
_double_, i.e. _standing on both ends_, after the supposed analogy of
ἀμφικύπελλον, but Eustathius interpreted it as _with handles on both
sides_, after the sounder analogy of ἀμφιφορεύς. These cumulative
analogies between Hissarlik and Homer, gathered incidentally to a climax
at the end of each work, are very striking.--{ED.}

[287] See Plate XVIII., No. 249.

[288] Ibid., No. 250.

[289] Ibid., No. 251.

[290] For these four vessels see Plate XVII., Nos. 243-246. The silver
bottles, with the caps and the side-rings to both, remind us of modern
travelling flasks.--{ED.}

[291] _Iliad_, XXIV. 228:--Ἦ, καὶ φωριαμῶν ἐπιθήματα κάλ’ ἀνέῳγεν, where
the “beautiful lids” remind us of the terra-cotta pattern which Dr.
Schliemann takes for the inlaying of a chest. (No. 77, p. 129). In the
_Iliad_, XVI., 221, Achilles opens the lid of the beautiful decorated
chest (χηλοῦ δ’ ἀπὸ πῶμ’ ἀνέῳγεν καλῆς δαιδαλέης), to take out the
goblet for pouring his libation. The contents of Priam’s chests may also
be well compared with the articles of the Treasure:--

    “He chose twelve gorgeous shawls, twelve single cloaks,
    As many rugs, as many splendid robes,
    As many tunics; then of gold he took
    Ten _talents_ full; two tripods, burnished bright,
    Four _caldrons_; then a _cup of beauty rare_,
    A rich possession, which the men of Thrace
    Had given, when there he went ambassador;
    E’en this he spared not, such his keen desire
    His son to ransom."--{ED.}


[292] The diadem discovered by Dr. Schliemann can scarcely have been the
κρήδεμνον of Homer, which was a large veil or mantilla, such, for
instance, as the sea-goddess Ino gives to Ulysses, to buoy him up on the
water (_Od._ v. 346). This diadem would rather seem to be, as Mr.
Gladstone has suggested, the πλεκτὴ ἀναδέσμη, which Andromache casts
from her head in her mourning for Hector, where the order of the words
implies that it was worn over the κρήδεμνον. _Il._ XXII. 469-471:--

    Τῆλε δ’ ἀπὸ κρατὸς βάλε δέσματα σιγαλόεντα,
    Ἄμπυκα κεκρύφαλόν τε ἰδὲ πλεκτὴν ἀναδέσμην
    Κρήδεμνόν θ', ὅ ῥά οἱ δῶκε χρυσέη Ἀφροδίτη.

    “Far off were flung the adornments of her head,
    The net, the _fillet_, and the _woven band_,
    The nuptial-veil by golden Venus given."--{ED.}

Our illustration (Plate XIX., Nos. 276, 277) represents one diadem as
set up by Dr. Schliemann, and the other as it might have been worn on
the head of a Trojan lady.--{ED.}

[293] These objects are more fully described, and figured, in the
following pages.

[294] See Plate XX., Nos. 279, 280, for a representation of the fillet
and ear-rings. The four “ear-rings” remind us, both by their _form_ and
_material_, of the “_beautifully twined tassels of solid gold_” which
fringed the _Ægis_ of Athena: _Iliad_, II. 448, 449:--

    Τῆς ἑκατὸν θύσανοι παγχρύσεοι ἠερέθονται,
    Πάντες ἐϋπλεκέες, ἑκατόμβοιος δὲ ἕκαστος.

                           “all around
    A hundred tassels hung, rare works of art,
    All gold, each one a hundred oxen’s price.”

Again, when Hera adorns herself to captivate Jove, her zone is fringed
with a hundred tassels, and her _ear-rings_ are described in terms
corresponding exactly to the _triple leaves_ seen on some of
Schliemann’s (_Iliad_, XIV. 181-3):--

    Ζώσατο δὲ ζώνην ἑκατὸν θυσάνοις ἀραρυῖαν,
    Ἐν δ’ ἄρα ἕρματα ἧκεν ἐϋτρήτοισι λοβοῖσιν
    Τρίγληνα μορόεντα· χάρις δ’ ἀπελάμπετο πολλή.

    “Her zone, from which a hundred tassels hung,
    She girt about her; and, _in three bright drops_,
    Her glittering gems suspended from her ears;
    And all around her grace and beauty shone."--{ED.}


[295] Some of these are shown on Plate XX., No. 278.

[296] Dr. Schliemann has strung these in two sets, one of which,
consisting of 4610 pieces, is represented as Cut No. 282. The other set,
of 4090 pieces, is precisely similar. The small jewels described are
shown in detail on Plate XX., No. 278.

[297] See Plate XX., at top.

[298] The subsequent analysis by M. Damour, of Lyon, has, however, shown
the presence of tin in some of the articles of the Treasure, see Note C,
p. 361.--{ED.}

[299] _Iliad_, VII. 452-453.

[300] No. 5, on p. 24. (See Appendix.)

[301] These silver φιάλαι, as shown in the photographs, are too much
battered to be worth engraving; but we give a very fine large silver
vase, which was found in a room of the Palace.--{ED.}

[302] _Iliad_, IV. 52.

[303] Nothing can be clearer than Homer’s own testimony on this point,
when he invokes the Muses to inspire him with the knowledge of what he
had only heard by report (_Iliad_, II. 484-487):--

    Ἔσπετε νῦν μοι, Μοῦσαι Ὀλύμπια δώματ’ ἔχουσαι,--
    Ὑμεῖς γὰρ θεαί ἐστε, πάρεστέ τε, ἴστε τε πάντα,
    Ἡμεῖς δὲ κλέος οἶον ἀκούομεν, οὐδέ τι ἴδμεν--
    Οἵ τινες ἡγεμόνες Δαναῶν καὶ κοίρανοι ἦσαν.

    “Say now, ye Nine, who on Olympus dwell,
    Muses--for ye are Goddesses, and ye
    Were present, and know all things: _we ourselves
    But hear from Rumour’s voice_, and nothing know--
    Who were the chiefs and mighty lords of Greece."--{ED.}


[304] See No. 14 on the Plate of Idols, p. 36.

[305] Plan I.

[306] Plan II.

[307] Plan III. (see p. 306).

[308] XIII. p. 599, ed. Forbiger.

[309] Certainly not; but they may have served for burning charcoal or
incense.--{ED.}

[310] See the similar example, No. 208, p. 294.

[311] This refers, of course, to Dr. Schliemann’s Atlas of photographic
illustrations, of which all the most valuable are reproduced in the
present translation in a greatly improved style of execution.--{ED.}

[312] _Æneid_, III. 302-305:--

    “Ante urbem in luco, falsi Simoëntis ad undam,
     Libabat cineri Andromache manesque vocabat
     Hectoreum ad tumulum, viridi quem cæspite inanem,
     Et geminas, causam lacrimis, sacraverat aras.”


[313] The _gramme_ = 15·43235 _grains_; or, approximately, 15¼
_grains_. The _ounce_ (avoirdupois) = 437½ _grains_; and the _pound_,
16 oz., = 7000 grs.

[314] Dr. Schliemann’s work records several interesting examples of his
first impressions on this point, and he appears more often to have
mistaken written characters for mere symbols or ornaments than the other
way.

[315] Curtius, _Die Ionier vor der Wanderung_, Berlin, 1855.

[316] Chabas, _Études sur l’Antiquité historique_, Paris, 1872, p. 190.

[317] Genesis x. 4, 5. The essential letters of the Hebrew name
[Hebrew: Javan] are identical with the Greek ΙΩΝ (Ion), and both
are equivalent to the _Yavanas_, the “younger race” of the old Aryan
traditions, who migrated to the West, while the elder branch remained in
the East. On the whole subject the Editor may be permitted to refer to
the _Student’s Ancient History of the East_, especially to Chapter XX.,
on the Nations of Asia Minor, which contains a discussion of the
Hellenic affinities of the Phrygians and Trojans in particular.

[318] Brandis, _Versuch zur Entzifferung der Kyprioten Schrift_, Berlin,
1873. See also the Life of Brandis by Curtius: _Johannes Brandis, ein
Lebensbild_, von Ernst Curtius, 1873.

[319] See pp. 83, 137, 161.

[320] ‘The Augsburg Gazette’ (_Augsburger Allgemeine Zeitung_), 1874, p.
32.

[321] The whorl on the left hand (the one discussed by Haug and Gomperz)
is engraved from M. Burnouf’s more accurate drawing in our lithographed
Plate LI., No. 496; the other is given at page 161; but they are
repeated here (from Schliemann’s Atlas, Pl. 13, No. 432, Pl. 6, No. 208)
in order to exhibit their identity. It is remarkable that these whorls,
belonging to an age when writing was already known, are very coarse,
both in material and work.

[322] Professor Gomperz gave an interesting and eloquent account of his
labours and their results in two papers in the ‘Vienna Evening Post’
(_Wiener Abendpost_) for May 6th, and June 26th, 1874.

[323] The ‘_Academy_’ for June 6th, 1874.

[324] From a letter to the Editor, dated Vienna, Dec. 9th, 1874, written
in English, as here quoted.

[325] Professor Gomperz adds that his change of opinion was at once
communicated to Moritz Schmidt, and published by him in a postscript to
his work, ‘Die Inschrift von Idalion und das Kyprische Syllabar.’ It has
also been published by Gomperz’s colleague, Professor Conze, in an
article on Schliemann’s discoveries in the ‘Preussische Jahrbücher.’

The _Academy_ of November 28th, 1874 (p. 591), quotes from the _Nation_
the following summary of the proceedings at the meeting of the _Oriental
Society_, held in New York at the end of October:--

“One of the most elaborate and interesting of the papers presented was a
review and criticism of the _Progress of Decipherment of the Cypriote
Inscriptions, with original additions_, by Mr. J. H. HALL. The latest
and best German investigator in this field, MORITZ SCHMIDT, laments that
he has not, in trustworthy form, the material from the _Di Cesnola
collections_; this Mr. Hall has undertaken to furnish him.”

We have now a fresh reason to lament the misfortune by which the Di
Cesnola collection was lost to our Museum.

[326] See B. Schröder, _Die phonicische Sprache_; Halle, 1869, p. 2,
fol.

[327] Besides the numbers of our own engravings, those of Schliemann’s
Atlas are given, as they have been hitherto used for reference in the
discussion by Haug, Gomperz, Max Müller, and other scholars.

[328] Identical design, but different material.








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Troy and its Remains, by 
Henry (Heinrich) Schliemann

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TROY AND ITS REMAINS ***

***** This file should be named 45190-0.txt or 45190-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/5/1/9/45190/

Produced by Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images available at The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
