The Project Gutenberg EBook of Gods and Heroes, by R. E. Francillon

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Gods and Heroes
       or The Kingdom of Jupiter

Author: R. E. Francillon

Release Date: April 20, 2014 [EBook #45416]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GODS AND HEROES ***




Produced by Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe, Sam W. and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







Transcriber's Note

The first instance of some proper nouns includes one or more accented
characters to indicate pronunciation, although subsequent occurrences
of the same proper noun have no accents. These are all preserved as
printed.

The original book included some instances of characters with an up tack
above. As the up tack above character is not available, this e-book
instead uses a grave above, e.g. à, è, ì, ò, ù, etc., as no grave accents
were used in the original.

The "Pronouncing Vocabulary of Proper Names" at the end of the book
contains an extensive range of accented characters. These include:

    characters with macron above, Ā, ā, Ē, ē, Ī, ī, ō, ū, ȳ, Ǣ, ǣ, œ̄, Œ̅
    characters with breve above, Ă, ă, Ĕ, ĕ, Ĭ, ĭ, Ŏ, ŏ, ŭ, y̆, Œ̆, Æ̆, æ̆
    characters with inverted breve below, a̯, e̯, o̯
    characters with dot above, Ȧ, ȧ, ġ
    characters with tilde above, Ẽ, ẽ, ĩ, ỹ
    upper and lower case a with diaresis below, A̤, a̤
    upper and lower case æ with grave above, Æ̀ and æ̀
    upper and lower case c with midline, C̵ and c̵
    lower case n with line below, ṉ
    upper and lower case œ with grave above, Œ̀ and œ̀
    s with up tack below, s̝
    lower case u with dot below, ụ
    y with grave above, ỳ

There is also a small amount of Greek, ευς.

If these characters do not display correctly, you may wish to adjust
your font, browser or reader settings. If this is not possible, you
may wish to refer to an alternative format of this e-book for the
Pronouncing Vocabulary.




             GODS AND HEROES
                   OR
         THE KINGDOM OF JUPITER


                   BY
            R. E. FRANCILLON


       AUTHORIZED AMERICAN EDITION


             GINN & COMPANY
  BOSTON · NEW YORK · CHICAGO · LONDON



             Copyright, 1894
           By R. E. FRANCILLON

           ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
                  37.1


           The Athenæum Press
      GINN & COMPANY · PROPRIETORS
             BOSTON · U.S.A.




                   TO
              Francis Felix
                FOR WHOM
           THIS BOOK WAS BEGUN




PREFACE.


These stories will, I trust, explain their own purpose; but a few
words touching their form are due to critical readers.

It will be seen that the Mythology adopted throughout is strictly of
the old-fashioned kind which goes to Ovid as its leading authority,
and ignores the difference between the gods of Greece and the gods of
Rome. I have deliberately followed this plan because, while there is
not the remotest fear--quite the contrary--that young people, when or
if they become scholars, will not be duly initiated into the mysteries
of scientific and comparative mythology, there is considerable danger
that the stories of the gods and heroes which have saturated
literature, and have become essential portions of the thought and life
of ages, may become explained away only too thoroughly. It is easy for
my readers to acquire the science of the subject hereafter; but where
mythology is concerned, the poetry must come before the prose, and it
will be a distinct loss for them if, under scientific teaching, they
have never been familiar with the ancient stories as they were read
by the makers of literature in the præ-critical times. Without the
mythology of the Latin poets, modern literature in all languages
becomes almost a dead letter: hundreds of allusions become pointless,
and thousands of substances fade into shadows. Of the three
mythologies, the Greek, the Roman, and the Poetic or Conventional, I
have selected the last, because--among other reasons--

It is as useful, and as needful to be known, as the others, on general
grounds;

It is more useful, and more needful, than the others, as a portion of
literature and as an intellectual influence;

It is preferable as a means of exciting an interest in the subject;

It is not in the remotest degree an obstacle to more accurate
knowledge, for which indeed it is an almost indispensable preparation.

After these observations, there is no occasion to explain why I have
made a point of employing Latin names and Latin spelling.

Another point to which I should call attention is the attempt to cover
(within limits) the whole ground, so that the reader may not be left
in ignorance of any considerable tract of the realm of Jove. The
stories are not detached; they are brought, so far as I have been able
to bring them, into a single _saga_, free from inconsistencies and
contradictions. Omissions owing to the necessarily prescribed limits
will, I think, always find a place to fall into. Altogether, the lines
of the volume diverge so entirely from those of Kingsley, or
Hawthorne, or any other story-teller known to me, that I may feel
myself safe from the danger of fatal comparisons. Of course this aim
at a certain completeness has implied the difficult task of selection
among variants of the same story or incident. Sometimes I have
preferred the most interesting, sometimes the version most consistent
with the general plan. But I have endeavored, as a rule, to adopt the
most usual or familiar, as being most in accordance with my original
intention.

I need not, however, enumerate difficulties, which, if they are
overcome, need no apology; and, if they are not, deserve none. The
greatest and most obvious, the strict observance of the "Maxima
reverentia," will, and must always remain, crucial. In this, at least,
I trust I have succeeded, in whatever else I may have failed. These
stories were begun for one who was very dear to me, and who was their
first and best critic; and I shall be glad if what was begun, in hope,
for him should be of use to others.

                                                    R. E. F.

NOTE.--Quantity is marked in proper names, when necessary, at their
first occurrence.




CONTENTS.


                                                                PAGE
  SATURN                                                           1

  JUPITER AND JUNO:

      PART I.--THE GODS AND THE GIANTS                             6

      PART II.--THE FIRST MAN; OR, THE STORY OF PROMETHEUS
        AND PANDORA                                               11

      PART III.--THE GREAT FLOOD; OR, THE STORY OF DEUCALION      18

  APOLLO:

      PART I.--THE STORIES OF LATONA AND NIOBE                    24

      PART II.--THE FLAYED PIPER; OR, THE STORY OF MARSYAS        28

      PART III.--TOO MUCH GOLD; OR, THE FIRST STORY OF MIDAS      33

      PART IV.--THE CRITIC; OR, THE SECOND STORY OF MIDAS         40

      PART V.--SOME FLOWER STORIES:

                 I.--THE LAUREL                                   44

                II.--THE HYACINTH                                 47

               III.--THE SUNFLOWER                                49

                IV.--THE NARCISSUS                                52

      PART VI.--PRESUMPTION; OR, THE STORY OF PHAËTHON            57

  DIANA; AND THE STORY OF ORION                                   62

  MINERVA; OR, WISDOM                                             69

  VENUS:

      PART I.--THE GOD OF FIRE                                    72

      PART II.--LOVE AND THE SOUL; OR, THE STORY OF CUPID
        AND PSYCHE                                                80

  MERCURY AND IRIS                                               105

  NEPTUNE                                                        109

  HADES:

      PART I.--THE KING AND QUEEN OF THE DEAD                    115

      PART II.--THE KINGDOM                                      122

      PART III.--ORPHEUS AND EURYDICE                            129

      PART IV.--THE MAN WHO NEVER DIED                           134

  THE ADVENTURES OF PERSEUS                                      137

  THE GOLDEN FLEECE                                              162

  A LOST SECRET                                                  185

  THE CHAMPION OF ATHENS                                         194

  THE HERO OF HEROES:

      PART I.--THE ORACLE                                        210

      PART II.--HIS FIRST LABOR: THE LION                        217

      PART III.--HIS SECOND LABOR: THE HYDRA                     220

      PART IV.--HIS THIRD LABOR: THE STAG                        224

      PART V.--HIS FOURTH LABOR: THE BOAR                        227

      PART VI.--HIS FIFTH LABOR: THE AUGEAN STABLE               233

      PART VII.--MORE LABORS: AND THE CATTLE OF GERYON           237

      PART VIII.--HIS ELEVENTH LABOR: THE GARDEN OF THE
        HESPERIDES                                               245

      PART IX.--HIS TWELFTH LABOR: THE DESCENT INTO HADES        253

      PART X.--THE CHOICE OF HERCULES                            260

      PART XI.--THE TUNIC OF NESSUS                              266

  THE APPLE OF DISCORD                                           276

  PRONOUNCING VOCABULARY OF PROPER NAMES                         287




SATURN.


Once upon a time, the Sky married the Earth. The Sky's name was
Cœlus, and the Earth's was Terra. They had a great many children:
one of these, the eldest, was called Titan, and another was called
Saturn.

Terra, their mother Earth, was very good and kind; but their father,
Cœlus, was very unkind and cruel. He hated his own children, and
shut them all up under ground, so that he might get rid of them--all
of them, that is to say, except Saturn, whom he allowed to have his
freedom. Saturn grew up; and he thought of nothing but how to set his
brothers free. At last one day he went to his mother, and asked her
what he could do. Terra had come to hate her husband for his cruelty:
so she gave Saturn all the iron she had in her veins--(you know that
iron comes from what are called the Veins of the Earth)--and he made a
great scythe with it. With this scythe he wounded and punished his
father so terribly that old Cœlus was never good for anything
again--in fact, we never hear of him any more, except when we turn
his name into Cœlum, which is the Latin for "the sky," as you know.

Saturn instantly let all his brothers out from their underground
prison. They were very grateful to him: and Titan, the eldest, said,
"You shall be king of us all, and of all the world, if you will only
promise me one thing." Saturn promised. "It is this," said Titan. "You
know how our father treated us; and how you treated him. Children are
plagues, and I don't want you to have anything to do with them.
Therefore promise me to eat up all your children, if you ever have
any, as soon as they are born. They'll be too young to mind and you'll
be safe from them. I think so much of this, that if you don't eat them
up, every one, I'll take the kingdom away from you. For I'm the
eldest, and I might keep it if I pleased instead of giving it up to
you."

Saturn had no children then, and he gave the promise. But sometime
afterwards he married a goddess named Rhea, who was very good and very
beautiful. They, too, had a great many children. But, alas! there was
that terrible promise that poor Saturn had made to Titan. Saturn could
not break his word, so he ate every child as soon as it was born. Of
course Rhea was very unhappy and miserable: it was worse, thought she,
than if he had only shut them underground. But there was the
promise--and she did not know what to do.

But she thought and thought, and at last she hit on a plan. When her
next child was born, she hid it away, and when Saturn asked for it to
eat it, she gave him a big stone instead of the baby. Saturn must have
had good teeth, for he ate it up, and only thought that the new baby's
bones were uncommonly hard. The trick answered so well that when the
next child was born she did it again,--and again she did it a third
time. She named the three children that she saved in this way,
Jupiter, Neptune, and Pluto.

Jupiter, the eldest, was a very fine, strong child. He made such a
noise with his crying that his mother Rhea was afraid Saturn would
hear him. So she sent him away to the island of Crete, where he was
brought up on goat's milk; and she ordered his nurses to make all the
noise they could with drums, trumpets, and cymbals all day and all
night long, so that nobody could hear him cry and so find out that he
was alive.

But unluckily her secret was found out by Titan. Titan thought Saturn
had been breaking his word; so he made war on him, and very nearly
conquered him and took his kingdom from him.

Jupiter, however, heard the noise of the battle through all the
cymbals, trumpets, and drums. He was only a year old, but so big and
strong that he rushed out of Crete, and fought a most desperate
battle against his uncles, the Titans, to save his father, Saturn. The
Titans were wonderful people. All were giants; and one of them had a
hundred arms. They threw mountains instead of stones. But Jupiter
conquered them at last, and set his father free.

But somehow Saturn was very much afraid of his son. I think I should
have been afraid of you if you had been such a wonderful baby. In some
way or other--I don't know how--he tried to get rid of Jupiter, and
made himself so unpleasant that Jupiter had to take his kingdom away
from him, and make himself king. That is how Jupiter became king of
all the gods and goddesses.

Saturn, when he lost his kingdom, went to Italy, where a king named
Janus received him very kindly. Saturn and Janus became such friends
that Janus made him king with him; and Saturn ruled so well that he
made his people the happiest in all the world. Everybody was perfectly
good and perfectly happy. Saturn's reign on earth is called the Golden
Age. His wife, Rhea, was with him, and was as good as he;--so he had
peace at last after all his troubles, which had no doubt taught him to
be wise.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Greek name for Saturn means "Time"; and Saturn is called the god
of Time, who swallows up all things and creatures. All creatures may
be called "the Children of Time." And the kingdom of Time, we may say,
must always come to an end. The whole story means a great deal more
than this; but this is enough to show you that it is not nonsense, and
means something. One of the planets is called Saturn.

       *       *       *       *       *

In pictures Saturn is always made an old man, because Time is old; and
he carries his scythe, because Time mows everything away, just as a
mower does the grass; or like "The Reaper whose name is Death." Only
Death, in the poem, is kinder than Saturn or Time.




JUPITER AND JUNO.


PART I.--THE GODS AND THE GIANTS.

When Jupiter became god and king of the whole world, he made his two
brothers, Neptune and Pluto, kings under him. He made Neptune god and
king of the sea: Pluto he made god and king of Hades. Hades was a
world underground, in the middle of the earth, where men and women go
and live when they die.

The next thing that Jupiter did was to marry Juno. Their wedding was
the grandest and most wonderful that ever was seen. Invitations were
sent out to all the gods and nymphs. The nymphs were a sort of
fairies--some of them waited upon the goddesses; some of them lived in
rivers, brooks, and trees. All of them came to the wedding, except one
nymph named Chelone.

She refused to come: and, besides that, she laughed at the whole
thing. When they told her that Jupiter was going to marry Juno, she
laughed so loud that Jupiter himself could hear her. I don't know why
she thought it so ridiculous, but I can guess pretty well. I expect
she knew Juno's bad temper better than Jupiter did, and how Jupiter
was just the sort of husband to spoil any wife's temper. But Jupiter
was very fond of Juno just then, and he did not like to be laughed at
on his wedding-day. So he had Chelone turned into a tortoise, so that
she might never be able to laugh again. Nobody ever heard a tortoise
laugh, nor ever will.

Jupiter and Juno set up their palace in the sky, just over the top of
Mount Olympus, a high mountain in the north of Greece. And very soon,
I am sorry to say, his quarrels with Juno began--so that, after all,
poor Chelone had been right in not thinking much of the grand wedding.
He always kept her for his Queen; but he cared for a great many
Titanesses and nymphs much more than he did for her, and married more
of them than anybody can reckon, one after another. This made Juno
very angry, and they used to quarrel terribly. But something was going
to happen which was almost as bad as quarreling, and which must have
made Jupiter envy the peace and comfort of old Saturn, who had become
only an earthly king.

The Titans made another war. And this time they got the help of the
Giants, who were more terrible even than the Titans. They were
immense monsters, some almost as tall as the tallest mountain,
fearfully strong, and horribly ugly, with hair miles long, and rough
beards down to their middle. One of them had fifty heads and a hundred
hands. Another had serpents instead of legs. Others, called Cyclopes,
had only one eye, which was in the middle of their foreheads. But the
most terrible of all was a giant named Typhon. He had a hundred heads,
each like a dragon's, and darted flames from his mouth and eyes. A
great battle was fought between the gods and the giants. The giants
tried to get into the sky by piling up the mountains one upon another.
They used oak-trees for clubs, and threw hills for stones. They set
whole forests on fire, and tossed them up like torches to set fire to
the sky. And at last Typhon's hundred fiery mouths set up a hundred
different yells and roars all at once, so loud and horrible that
Jupiter and all the gods ran away into Egypt and hid themselves there
in the shapes of animals. Jupiter turned himself into a ram, and Juno
became a cow.

But, when their fright was over, the gods came back into their own
shapes, and fought another battle, greater and more terrible than
before. And this time the gods won. Some of the giants were crushed
under mountains or drowned in the sea. Some were taken prisoners: and
of these some were beaten to death and others were skinned alive.
Atlas, who was the tallest, was ordered to spend all his days in
holding up the sky on his shoulders,--how it was held up before, I do
not know. Some of the Cyclopes were set to work in making thunderbolts
for Jupiter. They became the blacksmiths of the gods, and Mount Ætna,
which is a volcano, was one of their forges.

After this, the gods lived in peace: though Jupiter and Juno never
left off quarreling a good deal. Jupiter made most of his children
gods and goddesses, and they all lived together over Mount Olympus,
ruling the earth and the sky, and the air, the sun, and the stars. You
will read the stories of all of them. They used to eat a delicious
food called Ambrosia, and their wine was a wonderful drink called
Nectar. Hebe, the goddess of Youth, mixed and poured out the Nectar,
and Ganymede was Jupiter's own page and cup-bearer. These gods and
goddesses of the sky were a sort of large family, with Jupiter and
Juno for father and mother. Of course Neptune with his gods of the
sea, and Pluto with his gods of Hades, were like different families,
and lived in their own places.

Whenever it thunders, that is the voice of Jupiter. One of the planets
is named after him--it is a beautiful large white star. In pictures,
he is a large, strong man, with a thick brown beard, looking like a
king. He sits on a throne, with lightning in his hand, and an eagle
by his side. Juno is a large, beautiful woman, tall and grand, looking
like a queen, with a proud face and splendid eyes. The peacock is her
favorite bird, just as Jupiter's is the eagle.


PART II.--THE FIRST MAN; OR, THE STORY OF PROMETHEUS AND PANDORA.

One of the Titans left two sons, Prometheus and Epimetheus. Prometheus
means Forethought, and Epimetheus means Afterthought. Now Prometheus
was not big and strong like the other Titans, but he was more clever
and cunning than all of them put together. And he said to himself,
"Well, the gods have shown themselves stronger than we. We can't
conquer them by fighting, that's clear. But there are cleverer ways of
winning than by fighting, as they shall see."

So Prometheus dug up a good-sized lump of clay, more than six feet
long, and nearly four feet round. And now, said he to himself, "I only
want just one little spark of Heavenly Fire."

Now the Heavenly Fire is only to be found in the sky; and Jupiter had
ordered that no Titan was ever to enter the sky again. But Prometheus
was much too clever to find any difficulty about that. The great
goddess Minerva, who is the goddess of Wisdom, happened to be on a
visit to the earth just then, so Prometheus called upon her and
said:--

"Great goddess, I am only a poor, beaten Titan, and I have never seen
the sky. But my father and my father's father used to live there in
the good old times, and I should like, just once, to see the inside of
the beautiful blue place above the clouds which was once their home.
Please, great goddess, let me go in just once, and I'll promise to do
no harm."

Now Minerva did not like to break the rule. But she was very trusting
and very good-natured, because she was very wise; and besides,
Prometheus looked such a poor little creature, so different from all
the other Titans and Giants, that she said:--

"You certainly don't look as if you could do us any harm, even if you
tried. Very well--you shall have a look at the sky, and I'll show you
round."

So she told Prometheus to follow her up Mount Olympus; but she did not
notice a little twig that he carried in his hand: and if she had
noticed it, she would not have thought it mattered. Wise people don't
notice all the little things that cunning people do. Then she opened
the golden gate of the sky, and let him in. She was very kind, and
showed him everything. He went over the palace of the gods, and saw
Jupiter's great ivory throne, and his eagle, and the brew-house where
the nectar is made. He looked at the places behind the clouds, where
they keep the rain and snow. Then they looked at all the stars; and
at last they came to the Stables of the Sun. For you must know that
the sun is a great fiery car, drawn by four white horses from the east
to the west, and is put away in a stable during the night-time, where
the four horses eat wheat made of gold.

"Now you have seen everything," said Minerva; "and you must go."

"Thank you," said Prometheus. And he went back to earth again. But
just as he was leaving, he touched one of the wheels of the sun with
his little twig, so that a spark came off upon the end.

The spark was still there when he got home. He touched his lump of
clay with the spark of Heavenly Fire--and, lo and behold, the lump of
clay became a living man!

"There!" said Prometheus. "There's Something that will give the gods
more trouble than anything that ever was made!"

It was the First Man.

       *       *       *       *       *

Jupiter very soon found out what Prometheus had done, and was very
vexed and annoyed. He forgave Minerva, who was his favorite daughter,
but he said to the god of Fire: "Make something that will trouble the
man even more than the man will trouble me."

So the god of Fire took another lump of clay, and a great deal of
Heavenly Flame, and made the First Woman.

All the gods admired her very much, for she had been made very
nicely--better than the man. Jupiter said to her, "My child, go to
Prometheus and give him my compliments, and tell him to marry you."
The gods and goddesses thought it a good idea, and all of them made
her presents for her wedding. One gave her beauty, another wit,
another fine clothes, and so on; but Jupiter only gave her a little
box, which was not to be opened till her wedding-day.

       *       *       *       *       *

Prometheus was sitting one day at his door, thinking how clever he
was, when he saw, coming down Olympus, the most beautiful creature he
had ever seen. As soon as she came close--

"Who are you?" he asked. "From where do you come?"

"My name is Pandora," said she. "And I am come from the skies to marry
you."

"With all my heart," said Prometheus. "You will be a very nice wife, I
am sure. But--let me see--Pandora means 'All Gifts,' doesn't it? What
have you got to give me, to keep house upon?"

"The gods have given me everything!" said Pandora. "I bring you
Beauty, Wit, Love, Wisdom, Health, Wealth, Virtue, Fine Clothes--in a
word, everything that you can wish for."

"And that little box--what have you in that?" asked he.

"Oh, that's only a little box that Jupiter gave me--I don't know
what's in that, for it is not to be opened till after we're married.
Perhaps it is diamonds."

"Who gave it you?" asked he.

"Jupiter," said Pandora.

"Oho!" thought the cunning Prometheus. "Secret boxes from Jupiter are
not to my fancy. My dear," he said to Pandora, "on second thoughts, I
don't think I will marry you. But as you've had so much trouble in
coming, I'll send you to my brother Epimetheus, and you shall marry
him. He'll do just as well."

So Pandora went on to Epimetheus, and he married her. But Prometheus
had sent him a private message not to open the box that had been given
by Jupiter. So it was put away, and everything went on very well for a
long time.

       *       *       *       *       *

But, at last, Pandora happened to be alone in the house; and she could
not resist the temptation to just take one little peep into the box to
see what was inside. Such a little box could not hold any harm: and it
might be the most beautiful present of all. Anyhow, she could do no
harm by lifting the lid; she could easily shut it up again. She felt
she was doing what would displease Epimetheus, and was rather ashamed
of her curiosity, but--well, she _did_ open the box. And then--out
there flew thousands and thousands of creatures, like a swarm of wasps
and flies, buzzing and darting about with joy to be free. Out at the
window, and over the world they flew. Alas! they were all the evil
things that are in the world to torment and hurt mankind. Those flies
from Pandora's box were War, Pain, Grief, Anger, Sickness, Sorrow,
Poverty, Death, Sin. What could she do? She could not get them back
into the box again; she could only scream and wring her hands.
Epimetheus heard her cries, and did all he could: he shut down the lid,
just in time to keep the very last of the swarm from flying away. By
good luck, it was the only one worth keeping--a little creature called
Hope, who still lives in the box to comfort us when the others are
stinging us, and to make us say, "There is good in everything--even in
the box of Pandora."

But Jupiter, when he heard how Prometheus had refused to marry
Pandora, and had tried to outwit him again, was very angry indeed. He
sent down one of the gods, who took Prometheus and carried him to
Mount Caucasus, and bound him to the highest and coldest peak with
chains. And a vulture was sent to gnaw his heart forever.

So cunning could not conquer the strength of the gods after all.

I have something to say about this story, which you may not quite
understand now, but which you will, some day, when you read it again.
Think how Man is made of dead common clay, but with one spark of
Heavenly Fire straight from the sky. Think how Woman is made, with
less clay, but with more of the Heavenly Fire. Think of that
"Afterthought," which saved Hope when there was nothing else to be
saved, and think of the Pain sent to gnaw the heart of Prometheus, who
used all his cleverness to make himself great in wrong-doing.

You will be glad to hear that, a long time afterwards, the greatest
and best man in all Mythology came and killed the vulture, and set
Prometheus free. You will read all about it in time. But I want you to
know and remember the man's name. It was Hercules.


PART III.--THE GREAT FLOOD; OR, THE STORY OF DEUCALION.

Prometheus turned out to be quite right in saying that men would give
more trouble to Jupiter than the Titans or the Giants, or anything
that had ever been made. As time went on, men became more and more
wicked every day.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now there lived in Thessaly, on the banks of a river, a man and his
wife, named Deucalion and Pyrrha. I think they must have been good
people, and not like all the other men and women in the world. One
day, Deucalion noticed that the water in the river was rising very
high. He did not think much of it at the time, but the next day it was
higher, and the next higher still. At last the river burst its banks,
and spread over the country, sweeping away houses and drowning many
people.

Deucalion and Pyrrha escaped out of their own house just in time, and
went to the top of a mountain. But, to their terror, the waters still
kept on spreading and rising, until all the plain of Thessaly looked
like a sea, and the tops of the hills like islands.

"The water will cover the hills soon," said Deucalion, "and then the
mountains. What shall we do?"

Pyrrha thought for a moment, and then said:--

"I have heard that there is a very wise man on the top of Mount
Caucasus who knows everything. Let us go to him, and perhaps he will
tell us what to do and what all this water means."

So they went down the other side, and went on and on till they reached
the great Caucasian mountains, which are the highest in all Europe,
and are always covered with snow. They climbed up to the highest peak,
and there they saw a man, chained to the ice, with a vulture tearing
and gnawing him. It was Prometheus, who had made the first man.

Deucalion tried to drive the horrible bird away. But Prometheus
said:--

"It is no use. You can do nothing for me. Not even the Great Flood
will drive this bird away, or put me out of my pain."

"Ah! the Great Flood!" cried Deucalion and Pyrrha together. "We have
left it behind us--are we safe up here?"

"You are safe nowhere," said Prometheus. "Soon the waters will break
over the mountains round Thessaly and spread over the whole world.
They will rise and rise till not even this peak will be seen. Jupiter
is sending this flood to sweep away from the face of the earth the
wickedness of man. Not one is to be saved. Even now, there is nobody
left alive but you two."

Deucalion and Pyrrha looked: and, in the distance, they saw the waters
coming on, and rising above the hills.

"But perhaps," said Prometheus, "Jupiter may not wish to punish _you_.
I cannot tell. But I will tell you what to do--it _may_ save you. Go
down the mountain till you come to a wood, and cut down a tree." Then
he told them how to make a boat--for nobody knew anything about boats
in those days. Then he bade them good bye, and they went down the hill
sorrowfully, wishing they could help Prometheus, and doubting if they
could help themselves.

They came to the wood, and made the boat--just in time. The water
rose; but their boat rose with the water. At last even the highest
peak of Caucasus was covered, and they could see nothing but the sky
above them and the waters round. Then the clouds gathered and burst,
and the sky and the sea became one great storm.

For nine days and nights their little boat was tossed about by the
winds and waves. But on the tenth day, as if by magic, the sky
cleared, the water went down, and their boat was left high and dry on
the top of a hill.

They knelt, and thanked Jupiter, and went down the hill hand in
hand--the only man and the only woman in the whole world. They did not
even know where they were.

But presently they met, coming up the hill, a form like a woman, only
grander and more beautiful. They were afraid. But at last they had
courage to ask:--

"Who are you? And where are we?"

"This hill is Mount Parnassus; and I am Themis, the goddess of
Justice," said she. "I have finished my work upon the earth, and am on
my way home to the sky. I know your story. Live, and be good, and be
warned by what has happened to all other men."

"But what is the use of our living?" they asked, "and what is the use
of this great world to us two? For we have no children to come after
us when we die."

"What you say is just," said the goddess of Justice. "Jupiter will be
pleased enough to give this empty world to a wiser and better race of
men. But he will be quite as content without them. In short, you may
have companions, if you want them, and if you will teach them to be
better and wiser than the old ones. Only you must make them for
yourselves."

"But how can we make men?" asked they.

"I will tell you. Throw your grandmother's bones behind you without
looking round."

"Our grandmother's bones? But how are we to find them after this
flood, or to know which are hers?"

"The gods," said Themis, "tell people what to do, but not how it is to
be done." And she vanished into the air.

I think Themis was right. All of us are taught what we ought to do;
but we are usually left to ask ourselves whether any particular thing
is right or wrong.

Deucalion and Pyrrha asked one another; but neither knew what to say.
The whole world, after the Great Flood, was full of bones everywhere.
Which were their grandmother's, and where? They wandered about over
half the world trying to find them, but all in vain, till they thought
they would have to give it up in despair.

At last, however, Pyrrha said to Deucalion:--

"I have a thought. We are all called the children of Jupiter, you
know, because he is called the father of gods and men. And Jupiter and
all the gods are the children of Cœlus and Terra. Now, if we are
the children of Jupiter, and Jupiter is the child of Terra, then Terra
must be our grandmother. And Terra is the Earth; so our grandmother is
the Earth, you see."

"But," asked Deucalion, "what about the bones?"

"What are the bones of the Earth but the stones?" said Pyrrha. "The
stones must be our Grandmother's Bones."

"I don't think you're right," said Deucalion. "It's much too easy a
thing--only to throw a few stones. But there's no harm in trying."

So they gathered two heaps of stones, one for him and one for her, and
threw the stones behind them, over their shoulders, without turning
round--just as Themis had told them.

When they had thrown away all their stones, they looked to see if
anything had happened. And lo! every stone thrown by Pyrrha had become
a woman, and every stone thrown by Deucalion had become a man.

       *       *       *       *       *

So they kept on throwing stones till the world was full of men and
women again. And Deucalion and Pyrrha became their king and queen.




APOLLO.


PART I.--THE STORIES OF LATONA AND NIOBE.

Jupiter once fell in love with a beautiful Titaness named Latona. This
made Juno terribly angry: so she sent a huge and horrible snake,
called Python, to hunt Latona all over the world. And she went to
Terra, and made her swear not to give Latona a resting-place or a
hiding-place anywhere.

So poor Latona was hunted and driven about by Python night and day.
She also went to our Grandmother Earth, and begged for a corner to
rest in or a cave to hide in. But old Terra said, "No. I have sworn to
Juno that you shall have no rest in me."

At last, in her despair, she went to Neptune, and prayed him to hide
her in his waters, since Earth had refused her. Neptune said, "I wish
I could, with all my heart; but what place is there, in the sea or on
the land, where you can hide from the Queen of the Sky? But
wait--there's one thing that nobody knows of but me. There is an
island under the sea; and this island is always moving and wandering
about, so that nobody can see it, or tell where it may chance to be,
for it is never in the same place two minutes together. It isn't sea,
because its land; but it doesn't belong to Terra, because it's under
the sea, and has no bottom. I'll tell you what I'll do for you. I'll
fix it where nobody can find it, and you'll be safe there, because
it's neither earth nor sea."

So Neptune anchored the floating island in a part of the Ægean Sea.
The island is called Delos; and it is there still, just where it was
fixed by Neptune for Latona.

Latona went and lived there, safe from Juno and Python. After a time
she had two children, a son and a daughter. The son was named Apollo,
and the daughter Diana.

Both were beautiful, but Apollo was the most beautiful boy ever born.
He was a wonderful child in every way. The very instant he was born he
made a bow and arrow, and went across the sea, and found Python, and
killed him. When he was four years old, he built one of the wonders of
the world--a great altar to the gods, made of the horns of the goats
that his sister Diana used to hunt and shoot in the mountains. With
two such children to help her, Latona no longer felt afraid of Juno.
So she left Delos, and came, with her two children, into a country of
Asia Minor, called Lydia.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now there was a princess in Thebes named Niobe, who had fourteen
beautiful children--seven daughters and seven sons. She was very fond
and proud of them, and she did not like to hear people talking about
Latona's wonderful children. "What signifies a miserable couple of
children, when I have fourteen?" she used to say. "_I_ don't think
much of Latona"; and, in her jealousy, she never lost a chance of
insulting the mother of Apollo and Diana.

Of course these insults came to Latona's ears. Apollo and Diana heard
of them too; and they resolved to punish the proud princess who
insulted and scorned their mother. I scarcely like to tell you of how
they punished Niobe, for I cannot think of anything more cruel.

Each of them took a bow and seven arrows. Apollo shot with his arrows
all the seven sons of Niobe. Diana shot six of Niobe's seven
daughters, leaving only one alive. "There!" said they; "what signifies
a miserable one child, when our mother has two?"

When poor Niobe saw her children killed before her she wept bitterly,
and she could not stop her tears. They flowed on and on, until she
cried herself into stone.

As for Apollo, he kept on growing handsomer and stronger until he
became a god--the most glorious of all the gods in the sky. Jupiter
made him the god of the Sun, and made his sister, Diana, goddess of
the Moon. He was also the god of all beautiful and useful things: of
music, painting, poetry, medicine. Several names were given to him.
One of his names is "Phœbus," which means bright and splendid like
the sun. "Apollo" means "the Destroyer": people must guess for
themselves why he was called "the Destroyer."

In pictures and statues he is always made graceful, beautiful, and
young. He has no hair on his face, but wears long waving hair.
Sometimes he carries a lyre--a sort of small harp--and sometimes a
bow. Very often he wears a wreath of laurel. You must take a great
deal of notice of Apollo, or Phœbus, because he is the most famous
of all the gods next to Jupiter. It will help you to know him if you
think of him as always beautiful, wise, and bright, but rather cruel
and hard.


PART II.--THE FLAYED PIPER; OR, THE STORY OF MARSYAS.

The men who filled the earth after the Great Flood were a great deal
cleverer than people are now. A king's son named Cadmus invented the
alphabet--which is, perhaps, the most wonderful thing in the world.
And when he wanted to build the city of Thebes, he got a great
musician, named Amphion, to play to the stones and trees, so that
they, by dancing to his tunes, built themselves into walls and houses
without the help of any masons or carpenters. At last men became so
wonderfully clever in everything, that a physician named Æsculapius,
who was a son of Apollo, found out how to bring back dead people to
life again.

But when Jupiter heard that Æsculapius had really made a dead man
live, he was angry, and rather frightened too. For he thought, "If men
know how to live forever, they will become as great and as wise as the
gods, and who knows what will happen then?" So he ordered the Cyclopes
to make him a thunderbolt, and he threw it down from heaven upon
Æsculapius and killed him. No other man knew the secret of Æsculapius,
and it died with him.

But Apollo was very fond and proud of his son, and was in a great
rage with Jupiter for having killed him. He could not punish Jupiter,
but he took his bow and arrows and shot all the Cyclopes who had made
the thunderbolt.

Then it was Jupiter's turn to be angry with Apollo for killing his
servants, who had only done what they were told to do. He sentenced
him to be banished from the sky for nine years.

So Apollo left the sky and came down to the earth, bringing with him
nothing but his lyre. You know that Mount Olympus, where the gods
live, is in Thessaly, so that Thessaly was the country in which Apollo
found himself when he came down from the sky. He did not know what to
do with himself for the nine years, so he went to a king of Thessaly
named Admetus, who received him very kindly, and made him his
shepherd. I don't think Admetus could have known who Apollo was, or he
would hardly have set the great god of the Sun to look after his sheep
for him.

So Apollo spent his time pleasantly enough in watching the king's
sheep and in playing on his lyre.

Now there was a very clever but very conceited musician named Marsyas,
who had invented the flute, and who played on it better than anybody
in the world. One day Marsyas happened to be passing through Thessaly,
when he saw a shepherd sitting by a brook watching his sheep, and
playing to them very beautifully on a lyre. He went up to the
shepherd, and said:--

"You play very nicely, my man. But nobody can do much with those harps
and fiddles and trumpery stringed things. You should learn the flute;
then you'd know what music means!"

"Indeed?" said Apollo. "I'm sorry, for your sake, that your ears are
so hard to please. As for me, I don't care for whistles and squeaking
machines."

"Ah!" said Marsyas, "that's because you never heard Me!"

"And you dare to tell me," said Apollo, "that you put a wretched
squeaking flute before the lyre, which makes music for the gods in the
sky?"

"And you dare to say," said Marsyas, "that a miserable twanging,
tinkling lyre is better than a flute? What an ignorant blockhead you
must be!"

At last their wrangling about their instruments grew to quarreling;
and then Apollo said:--

"We shall never settle the question in this way. We will go to the
next village and give a concert. You shall play your flute and I will
play my lyre, and the people shall say which is the best--yours or
mine."

"With all my heart," said Marsyas. "I know what they will say. But we
must have a wager on it. What shall it be?"

"We will bet our skins," said Apollo. "If I lose, you shall skin me;
and if you lose, I will skin you."

"Agreed," said Marsyas.

So they went to the next village, and called the people together to
judge between the flute and the lyre.

Marsyas played first. He played a little simple tune on his flute so
beautifully that everybody was charmed. But Apollo then played the
same tune on his lyre, even more beautifully still.

Then Marsyas took his flute again and played all sorts of difficult
things--flourishes, runs, shakes, everything you can think of--in the
most amazing manner, till the people thought they had never heard
anything so wonderful. And indeed never had such flute-playing been
heard.

But Apollo, instead of following him in the same fashion, only played
another simple tune--but this time he sang while he played.

You can imagine how gloriously the god of Music sang! You can fancy
how much chance Marsyas had of winning when Apollo's voice was
carrying the hearts of the people away.... "There," said Apollo, when
he had finished, "beat that if you can--and give me your skin!"

"It is not fair," said Marsyas. "This is not a singing match: the
question is, Which is the best instrument--the flute or the lyre?"

"It _is_ fair," said Apollo. "If you can sing while you are playing
the flute, then I have nothing to say. But you can't sing, you see,
because you have to use your lips and your breath in blowing into
those holes. Is not that instrument best which makes you sing
best--Yes or No? And if I mustn't use my breath, you mustn't use
yours."

You must judge for yourself which was right. But the people decided
for Apollo. And so Apollo, having won the wager, took Marsyas and
skinned him, and hung his body on a tree.


PART III.--TOO MUCH GOLD; OR, THE FIRST STORY OF MIDAS.

There were other beings besides men upon the earth in those days. You
ought to know something about them now, because Apollo, while he was
banished from the sky, had a great deal to do with them. These beings
were called Nymphs, Fauns, and Satyrs.

The Nymphs were a kind of beautiful she-fairies.

Dryads were nymphs who lived in forests.

Hamadryads were nymphs who lived in trees. Every tree has a Hamadryad,
who lives in it, who is born when it first grows, and who dies when it
dies. So that a Hamadryad is killed whenever a tree is cut down.

Naiads were nymphs belonging to brooks and rivers. Every stream has
its Naiad.

Ŏreads were nymphs who lived upon hills and mountains. They used to
attend upon Apollo's sister Diana, who went hunting every moonlight
night among the hills.

The Fauns and Satyrs were he-creatures, like men, with the hind-legs
of goats, short horns on their foreheads, and long pointed ears. But
there was a difference between the Fauns and Satyrs. The Fauns were
handsome, gentle, innocent, and rather foolish. The Satyrs were
hideous, clumsy, hairy monsters, with flat faces, little eyes, and
huge mouths, great gluttons, often drunk, and sometimes mischievous:
most of them were dull and stupid, but many of them had plenty of
sense and knowledge. The Fauns and Satyrs lived among the woods and
hills, like the Dryads and Oreads.

The king of all these Nymphs, Fauns, and Satyrs was a god named Pan,
who was himself a very hideous satyr. He had nothing to do with the
gods of Olympus, but lived on the earth, chiefly in a part of Greece
called Arcadia. "Pan" is the Greek for "all"--you may remember the
same word in the name of "_Pan_-dora." He was called "Pan" because he
was the god of "all" nature--all the hills and mountains, all the
woods and forests, all the fields, rivers, and streams.

The ugliest, fattest, greediest, tipsiest, cleverest, and wisest of
all the satyrs was named Silenus. He was hardly ever sober, but he
knew so much and understood the world so well, that one of the gods,
named Bacchus, made Silenus his chief adviser and counselor. You will
hear more of Bacchus later on. I will only tell you now that he was
not one of the great gods of Olympus, but lived on the earth, like
Pan. Only, while Pan was the god of all wild, savage nature, Bacchus
was the god of nature as men make it: Bacchus taught men to turn Pan's
wild woods into corn-fields and gardens, to put bees into hives, and
to make wine. I think Silenus had an especially great deal to do with
the wine-making. You will often hear Bacchus called the god of wine,
and so he was; but he was a great deal more and better.

This has been a long beginning to my story; but if you will get it
well into your head, you will find it easy to remember, and will make
a great step in understanding mythology.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now once upon a time Silenus got very drunk indeed--more drunk even
than usual. He was traveling about with Bacchus, but had strayed away
by himself, and, when night came on, could not find his way back into
the road. He could do nothing but blunder and stagger about in the
middle of the thick, dark forest, stumbling and sprawling over the
roots of the trees, and knocking his head against the branches. At
last he gave a tremendous tumble into a bush, and lay there, too drunk
and too fat to pick himself up again. So he went to sleep and snored
terribly.

Presently some huntsmen passed by, and thought they heard some wild
beast roaring. You may guess their surprise when they found this
hideous old satyr helplessly drunk and unable to move. But they did
not catch a satyr every day: so they took him by the head and
shoulders, and brought him as a prize to the king.

This king was King Midas of Phrygia, which is a country in Asia Minor.
As soon as King Midas saw the satyr, he guessed him to be Silenus, the
friend of Bacchus: so he did everything to make him comfortable till
his drunkenness should pass away. It passed away at last; and then
King Midas sent all round about to find where Bacchus was, so that
Silenus might go back to him. While the search was being made, the
king and the satyr became great friends, and Silenus, keeping fairly
sober, gave Midas a great deal of good advice, and taught him science
and philosophy.

At last Bacchus was found; and Midas himself brought Silenus back to
him. Bacchus was exceedingly glad to see Silenus again, for he was
beginning to be afraid that he had lost him forever. "Ask any gift you
please," he said to King Midas, "and it shall be yours."

"Grant me," said Midas, "that everything I touch shall turn into
gold."

Bacchus looked vexed and disappointed. But he was bound by his
promise, and said:--

"It is a fool's wish. But so be it. Everything you touch _shall_ turn
to gold."

       *       *       *       *       *

Midas thanked Bacchus, said good-bye to Silenus and went home. How
rich he was going to be--the richest king in the whole world! He
opened his palace door, and lo! the door became pure, solid gold. He
went from room to room, touching all the furniture, till everything,
bedsteads, tables, chairs, all became gold. He got a ladder (which
turned into gold in his hands) and touched every brick and stone in
his palace, till his whole palace was gold. His horses had golden
saddles and golden bridles. His cooks boiled water in golden kettles:
his servants swept away golden dust with golden brooms.

When he sat down to dinner, his plate turned to gold. He had become
the richest man in the world, thought he with joy and pride, as he
helped himself from the golden dish before him. But suddenly his teeth
jarred against something hard--harder than bone. Had the cook put a
flint into the dish? Alas! it was nothing of the kind. His very food,
as soon as it touched his lips, turned to solid gold!

His heart sank within him, while the meat before him mocked his
hunger. Was the richest man in the world to starve? A horrible fear
came upon him. He poured out wine into a golden cup, and tried to
drink, and the wine turned into gold! He sat in despair.

What was he to do? What was the use of all this gold if he could not
buy with it a crust of bread or a draught of water? The poorest
ploughman was now a richer man than the king. He could only wander
about his golden palace till his hunger became starvation, and his
thirst a fever. At last, in his despair, he set out and followed after
Bacchus again, to implore the god to take back the gift of gold.

At last, when nearly starved to death, he found him. "What!" said
Bacchus, "are you not content yet? Do you want more gold still?"

"Gold!" cried Midas, "I hate the horrible word! I am starving. Make me
the poorest man in the whole world. Silenus taught me much; but I have
learned for myself that a mountain of gold is not the worth of a
single drop of dew."

"I will take back my gift, then," said Bacchus. "But I will not give
you another instead of it, because all the gods of Olympus could not
give you anything better than this lesson. You may wash away your
folly in the first river you come to. Good-bye--and only don't think
that gold is not a good thing because too much of it is a bad one."

Midas ran to the banks of the river Pactolus, which ran hard by. He
threw off his golden clothes, and hurried barefoot over the sands of
the river--and the sand, wherever his naked feet touched it, turned to
gold. He plunged into the water, and swam through to the other side.
The Curse of the Golden Touch left him, and he ate and drank, and
never hungered after gold again. He had learned that the best thing
one can do with too much gold is to give it away as fast as one can.

The sand of the river Pactolus is said to have gold in it to this day.


PART IV.--THE CRITIC; OR, THE SECOND STORY OF MIDAS.

Once upon a time the god Pan fell in love with a Naiad, or
water-nymph, named Syrinx. She was very beautiful, as all the nymphs
were; but Pan, as you know, was very ugly--so ugly that she hated him,
and was afraid of him, and would have nothing to do with him. At last,
to escape from him, she turned herself into a reed.

But even then Pan did not lose his love for her. He gathered the reed,
and made it into a musical instrument, which he called a Syrinx. We
call it a Pan-pipe, after the name of its inventor, and because upon
this pipe Pan turned into music all his sorrow for the loss of Syrinx,
making her sing of the love to which she would not listen while she
was alive.

I suppose that King Midas still kept up his friendship for Silenus and
the satyrs, for one day he was by when Pan was playing on his pipe of
reeds, and he was so delighted with the music that he cried out, "How
beautiful! Apollo himself is not so great a musician as Pan!"

You remember the story of Marsyas, and how angry Apollo was when
anybody's music was put before his own? I suppose that some
ill-natured satyr must have told him what King Midas had said about
him and Pan. Anyway, he was very angry indeed. And Midas, the next
time he looked at himself in his mirror, saw that his ears had been
changed into those of an Ass.

This was to show him what sort of ears those people must have who like
the common music of earth better than the music which the gods send
down to us from the sky. But, as you may suppose, it made Midas very
miserable and ashamed. "All my people will think their king an Ass,"
he thought to himself, "and that would never do."

So he made a very large cap to cover his ears, and never took it off,
so that nobody might see what had happened to him. But one of his
servants, who was very prying and curious, wondered why the king
should always wear that large cap, and what it was that he could want
to hide. He watched and watched for a long time in vain. But at last
he hid himself in the king's bedroom; and when Midas undressed to go
to bed, he saw to his amazement that his master had Ass's ears.

He was very frightened too, as well as amazed. He could not bear to
keep such a curious and surprising secret about the king all to
himself, for he was a great gossip, like most people who pry into
other people's affairs. But he thought to himself, "If I tell about
the king's ears he will most certainly cut off my own! But I _must_
tell somebody. Whom shall I tell?"

So, when he could bear the secret no longer, he dug a hole into the
ground, and whispered into it, "King Midas has the Ears of an Ass!"
Then, having thus eased his mind, he filled up the hole again, so that
the secret might be buried in the earth forever.

       *       *       *       *       *

But all the same, before a month had passed, the secret about the
king's ears was known to all the land. How could that be? The king
still wore his cap, and the servant had never dared to speak about it
to man, woman, or child. You will never be able to guess how the
secret got abroad without being told.

It was in this way. Some reeds grew up out of the place where the
servant had made the hole, and of course the reeds had heard what had
been whispered into the ground where their roots were. And they were
no more able to keep such a wonderful secret to themselves than the
servant had been. Whenever the wind blew through them they rustled,
and their rustle said, "King Midas has the Ears of an Ass!" The wind
heard the words of the reeds, and carried the news through all the
land, wherever it blew, "King Midas has the Ears of an Ass!" And all
the people heard the voice of the wind, and said to one another, "What
a wonderful thing--King Midas has the ears of an Ass!"


PART V.--SOME FLOWER STORIES.


I.--THE LAUREL.

One day, Apollo, while following his flock of sheep, met a little boy
playing with a bow and arrows.

"That isn't much of a bow you've got there," said Apollo.

"Isn't it?" said the boy. "Perhaps not; but all the same, I don't
believe you've got a better, though you're so big and I'm so small."

Now you know that Apollo never could bear to be told that anybody
could have anything, or do anything, better than he. You remember how
he treated Marsyas and Midas for saying the same kind of thing. So he
took his own bow from his shoulder, and showed it to the boy, and
said, "As you think you know so much about bows and arrows, look at
that; perhaps you'll say that the bow which killed the great serpent
Python isn't stronger than your trumpery little toy."

The boy took Apollo's bow and tried to bend it; but it was much too
strong for him. "But never mind," said he. "My little bow and arrows
are better than your big ones, all the same."

Apollo was half angry and half amused. "You little blockhead! how do
you make out that?" asked he.

"Because," said the boy, "your bow can kill everybody else--but mine
can conquer _you_. You shall see."

And so saying he let fly one of his arrows right into Apollo's heart.
The arrow was so little that Apollo felt nothing more than the prick
of a pin: he only laughed at the boy's nonsense, and went on his way
as if nothing had happened.

       *       *       *       *       *

But Apollo would not have thought so little of the matter if he had
known that his heart had been pricked by a magic arrow. The boy's name
was Cupid: and you will read a good deal about him both in this book
and in others. Oddly enough, though the boy was one of the gods of
Olympus, Apollo had never seen him before, and knew nothing about him.
Perhaps Cupid had not been born when Apollo was banished from the sky.
However this may be, there is no doubt about what Cupid's arrows could
do. If he shot into the hearts of two people at the same time with two
of his golden arrows, they loved each other, and were happy. But if he
shot only one heart, as he did Apollo's, that person was made to love
somebody who did not love him in return, and perhaps hated him: so he
became very miserable.

So it happened to Apollo. He became very fond of a nymph named
Daphne. But though he was so great and glorious a god, and she only a
Naiad, she was only afraid of him and would have nothing to do with
him--because Cupid, out of mischief, shot her heart with one of his
leaden arrows, which prevented love. Apollo prayed her to like him;
but she could not, and when she saw him coming used to hide away at
the bottom of her river.

But one day she was rambling in a wood a long way from her home. And,
to her alarm, she suddenly saw Apollo coming towards her. She took to
her heels and ran. She ran very fast indeed; but her river was far
away, and Apollo kept gaining upon her--for nobody on the earth or in
the sky could run so fast as he. At last she was so tired and so
frightened that she could run no longer, and was obliged to stand
still.

"Rather than let Apollo touch me," she said, "I would be a Hamadryad,
and never be able to run again!"

She wished it so hard, that suddenly she felt her feet take root in
the earth. Then her arms turned to branches, and her fingers to twigs,
and her hair to leaves. And when Apollo reached the spot, he found
nothing but a laurel bush growing where Daphne had been.

That is why "Daphne" is the Greek for "Laurel." And forever after
Apollo loved the bush into which Daphne had been turned. You may know
Apollo in pictures by his laurel wreath as well as by his lyre and
bow.

It is a very ancient saying that "Love conquers all things." And that
is exactly what Cupid meant by saying that his toy-bow was stronger
even than the bow which had killed Python, and could conquer with ease
even the god of the Sun.


II.--THE HYACINTH.

You remember that Apollo and Diana were born in the island of Delos.
The part of Delos where they were born was a mountain called Cynthus;
and for that reason Apollo was often called Cynthius, and Diana,
Cynthia. Bear this in mind, in order to follow this story.

       *       *       *       *       *

While Apollo was on earth, Amyclas, the King of Sparta, engaged him to
be the teacher of his son. This boy, named Hyacinthus, was so handsome
and so amiable that Apollo became exceedingly fond of him; indeed, he
could not bear to be away from his pupil's company.

But the west wind, whose name is Zephyrus, was also very fond of the
boy, whose chief friend he had been before Apollo came. He was afraid
that the son of Amyclas liked Apollo best; and this thought filled him
with jealousy. One day, as he was blowing about the king's garden, he
saw Apollo and the boy playing at quoits together. "Quoits" are heavy
rings made of iron: each player takes one, and throws it with all his
strength at a peg fixed in the ground, and the one who throws his
quoit nearest to the peg wins the game. Zephyrus was so angry and
jealous to see the two friends amusing themselves while he was blowing
about all alone, that he determined to be revenged upon both of them.

First of all the boy threw his quoit, and came very near to the peg
indeed--so near that even Apollo, who could do everything better than
anybody, thought he should find it very hard to beat him. The peg was
a great way off, so Apollo took up the heaviest quoit, aimed perfectly
straight, and sent it flying like a thunderbolt through the air. But
Zephyrus, who was waiting, gave a great blast, and blew Apollo's quoit
as it was flying, so that it struck the boy, who fell to the ground.

It was a cruel thing altogether. Apollo thought that he himself had
struck his friend by aiming badly: the boy thought the same, for
neither could tell it was Zephyrus,--nobody has ever seen the wind.

So perished Hyacinthus: nor could Apollo do anything to show his love
and grief for his friend except change him into a flower, which is
called Hyacinth to this day. It is said that, if you look, you will
find "Hya" written in Greek letters upon every petal of the flower.
Some people, however, say that it is not "Hya" at all, but "Aiai,"
which means "alas." I don't know which is true; but if you will some
day look at the petal of a hyacinth through a microscope (the stronger
the better, I should say), you will find out for yourself and be able
to tell me.

       *       *       *       *       *

Apollo seems to have been rather fond of turning his friends into
trees and flowers. There was another friend of his named Cyparissus,
who once, by accident, killed one of Apollo's favorite stags, and was
so sorry for what he had done, and pined away so miserably, that the
god, to put him out of his misery, changed him into a cypress-tree.
"Cypress" comes from Cyparissus, as you will easily see. And we still
plant the cypress in churchyards, because it is the tree of tears and
mourning that cannot be cured.


III.--THE SUNFLOWER.

There was a nymph named Clytie, who was so beautiful that Apollo fell
in love with her. She was very proud and glad of being loved by the
god of the Sun, and loved him a great deal more than he loved her.
But she believed that his love was as great as her own: and so she
lived happily for a long time.

But one day, Apollo happened to see a king's daughter, whose name was
Leucothoe. He thought she was the most beautiful creature he had ever
seen: so he fell in love with her, and forgot Clytie as much as if
there was nobody but Leucothoe in the world. Clytie, however, knew
nothing of all this, and only wondered why Apollo never came to see
her any more.

Now the king, whose name was Orchamus, kept his daughter very
strictly: and did not wish her to have anything to do with Apollo. I
suppose he was afraid of Apollo's loving her for a time, and then
leaving her to be miserable and unhappy, as happened to many nymphs
and princesses in those days besides Clytie. So when King Orchamus
found that Apollo was making love to Leucothoe, he shut her up in his
palace, and would not allow her to go out or anybody else to go in.

But Apollo was much too clever to be beaten in that way. He disguised
himself as Leucothoe's own mother, and so came to see her whenever he
pleased, without anybody being anything the wiser. And so everything
went on just as he wished, if it had not been for Clytie, whom he had
treated just as King Orchamus was afraid he would treat Leucothoe.

Clytie wondered why Apollo never came to see her till she could bear
it no longer; and she watched him, to find out what was the reason of
it all. She watched till at last she saw somebody who looked like a
queen go into the palace of King Orchamus. But she knew Apollo much
too well to be taken in by any disguise. She secretly followed him
into the palace, and found him making love to Leucothoe.

In her misery and jealousy, she went straight to King Orchamus, and
told him what she had seen. Perhaps she hoped that the king would send
his daughter away altogether, so that Apollo would then come back to
her. She could not possibly foresee what would really happen. King
Orchamus was so enraged with his daughter for receiving Apollo's
visits against his commands that he ordered Leucothoe to be buried
alive. Of course he could not punish Apollo: because Apollo was a god,
while he was only a king.

Perhaps you will think that Apollo might have managed to save
Leucothoe from such a terrible death as her father had ordered for
her. As he did not, I suppose that King Orchamus had her buried before
anybody could tell the news--at any rate she was dead when Apollo
arrived at her grave. All he could do for her was to show his love and
his sorrow by turning her into a tree from which people take a
sweet-smelling gum called myrrh.

As to Clytie, whose jealousy had caused the death of the princess, he
refused ever to speak to her or look at her again: and he turned her
into a sunflower, which has no perfume like the myrrh-tree into which
he had changed Leucothoe. But, in spite of his scorn and of everything
he could do to her, Clytie loved him still: and though he would not
look at her, she still spends her whole time in gazing up at him with
her blossoms, which are her eyes. People say that the blossoms of the
sunflower always turn toward the sun--towards the east when he is
rising, toward the west when he is setting, and straight up at noon,
when he is in the middle of the sky. Of course, like all other
blossoms, they close at night, when he is no longer to be seen. As for
the sun himself, I suspect he has forgotten both Clytie and Leucothoe
long ago; and sees no difference between them and any other trees or
flowers.


IV.--THE NARCISSUS.

This story has nothing to do with Apollo: but I may as well tell it
among the other flower stories.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was a very beautiful nymph named Echo, who had never, in all her
life, seen anybody handsomer than the god Pan. You have read that Pan
was the chief of all the Satyrs, and what hideous monsters the Satyrs
were. So, when Pan made love to her, she very naturally kept him at a
distance: and, as she supposed him to be no worse-looking than the
rest of the world, she made up her mind to have nothing to do with
love or love-making, and was quite content to ramble about the woods
all alone.

But one day, to her surprise, she happened to meet with a young man
who was as different from Pan as any creature could be. Instead of
having a goat's legs and long hairy arms, he was as graceful as Apollo
himself: no horns grew out of his forehead, and his ears were not
long, pointed, and covered with hair, but just like Echo's own. And he
was just as beautiful in face as he was graceful in form. I doubt if
Echo would have thought even Apollo himself so beautiful.

The nymphs were rather shy, and Echo was the very shyest of them all.
But she admired him so much that she could not leave the spot, and at
last she even plucked up courage enough to ask him, "What is the name
of the most beautiful being in the whole world?"

"Whom do you mean?" asked he. "Yourself? If you want to know your own
name, you can tell it better than I can."

"No," said Echo, "I don't mean myself, I mean _you_. What is _your_
name?"

"My name is Narcissus," said he. "But as for my being beautiful--that
is absurd."

"Narcissus!" repeated Echo to herself. "It is a beautiful name. Which
of the nymphs have you come to meet here in these woods all alone? She
is lucky--whoever she may be."

"I have come to meet nobody," said Narcissus. "But--am I really so
beautiful? I have often been told so by other girls, of course; but
really it is more than I can quite believe."

"And you don't care for any of those girls?"

"Why, you see," said Narcissus, "when all the girls one knows call one
beautiful, there's no reason why I should care for one more than
another. They all seem alike when they are all always saying just the
same thing. Ah! I do wish I could see myself, so that I could tell if
it was really true. I would marry the girl who could give me the wish
of my heart--to see myself as other people see me. But as nobody can
make me do that, why, I suppose I shall get on very well without
marrying anybody at all."

Looking-glasses had not been invented in those days, so that Narcissus
had really never seen even so much of himself as his chin.

"What!" cried Echo, full of hope and joy; "if I make you see your own
face, you will marry _me_?"

"I said so," said he. "And of course what I say I'll do, I'll do."

"Then--come with me!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Echo took him by the hand and led him to the edge of a little lake in
the middle of the wood, full of clear water.

"Kneel down, Narcissus," said she, "and bend your eyes over the
water-side. That lake is the mirror where Diana comes every morning to
dress her hair, and in which, every night, the moon and the stars
behold themselves. Look into that water, and see what manner of man
you are!"

Narcissus kneeled down and looked into the lake. And, better than in
any common looking-glass, he saw the reflected image of his own
face--and he looked, and looked, and could not take his eyes away.

But Echo at last grew tired of waiting. "Have you forgotten what you
promised me?" asked she. "Are you content now? Do you see now that
what I told you is true?"

He lifted his eyes at last. "Oh, beautiful creature that I am!" said
he. "I am indeed the most divine creature in the whole wide world. I
love myself madly. Go away. I want to be with my beautiful image, with
myself, all alone. I can't marry you. I shall never love anybody but
myself for the rest of my days." And he kneeled down and gazed at
himself once more, while poor Echo had to go weeping away.

Narcissus had spoken truly. He loved himself and his own face so much
that he could think of nothing else: he spent all his days and nights
by the lake, and never took his eyes away. But unluckily his image,
which was only a shadow in the water, could not love him back again.
And so he pined away until he died. And when his friends came to look
for his body, they found nothing but a flower, into which his soul had
turned. So they called it the Narcissus, and we call it so still. And
yet I don't know that it is a particularly conceited or selfish
flower.

As for poor Echo, she pined away too. She faded and faded until
nothing was left of her but her voice. There are many places where she
can even now be heard. And she still has the same trick of saying to
vain and foolish people whatever they say to themselves, or whatever
they would like best to hear said to them. If you go where Echo is,
and call out loudly, "I am beautiful!"--she will echo your very words.


PART VI.--PRESUMPTION; OR, THE STORY OF PHAËTHON.

There was a nymph named Clymene, who had a son so handsome that he was
called Phaëthon, which means in Greek, "bright, radiant, shining,"
like the sun. When he grew up the goddess Venus was so charmed with
him that she made him the chief ruler of all her temples, and took him
into such high favor that all his friends and companions were filled
with envy.

One day, when Phaëthon was foolishly bragging about his own beauty and
greatness, and how much he was put by a goddess above other men, one
of his companions, named Epaphus, answered him, scornfully:--

"Ah! you may boast and brag, but you are a nobody after all! _My_
father was Jupiter, as everybody knows; but who was yours?"

So Phaëthon went to his mother Clymene, and said:--

"Mother, they taunt me for not being the son of a god; me, who am fit
to be a god myself for my grace and beauty. Who was my father? He
must at least have been some great king, to be the father of such a
son as I."

"A king!" said Clymene. "Ay--and a greater than all kings! Tell them,
from me, that your father is Phœbus Apollo, the god of the Sun!"

But when he went back and told his friends, "My father is Phœbus
Apollo, the god of the Sun," Epaphus and the others only scorned him
and laughed at him the more. "You've caught your bragging from your
mother," said they. "You're _her_ son, anyhow, whoever your father may
be."

When Clymene heard this, she felt terribly offended. "Then I will
prove my words," said she. "Go to the Palace of the Sun and enter
boldly. There you will see the Sun-god in all his glory. Demand of him
to declare you to be his son openly before all the world, so that even
the sons of Jupiter shall hang their heads for shame."

If Apollo had been still banished upon earth, of course Phaëthon could
have found him very easily. But the nine years of banishment were over
now, and the only way to find the god of the Sun was to seek him in
his palace above the sky. How Phaëthon managed to get there I have
never heard; but I suppose his mother was able to tell him the secret
way. You may imagine the glorious and wonderful place it was--the
House of the Sun, with the stars for the windows that are lighted up
at night, and the clouds for curtains, and the blue sky for a garden,
and the Zodiac for a carriage-drive. The sun itself, as you have
heard, is the chariot of Apollo, drawn by four horses of white fire,
who feed on golden grain, and are driven by the god himself round and
round the world. Phaëthon entered boldly, as his mother had told him,
found Apollo in all his glory, and said:--

"My mother, Clymene, says that I am your son. Is it true?"

"Certainly," said Apollo, "it is true."

"Then give me a sign," said Phaëthon, "that all may know and believe.
Make me sure that I am your son."

"Tell them that _I_ say so," said Apollo. "There--don't hinder me any
more. My horses are harnessed: it is time for the sun to rise."

"No," said Phaëthon, "they will only say that I brag and lie. Give me
a sign for all the world to see--a sign that only a father would give
to his own child."

"Very well," said Apollo, who was getting impatient at being so
hindered. "Only tell me what you want me to do, and it shall be done."

"You swear it--by Styx?" said Phaëthon.

Now you must know that the Styx was a river in Hades by which the gods
swore; and that an oath "by Styx" was as binding upon a god as a
plain promise is upon a gentleman.

"I swear it--by Styx!" said Apollo, rather rashly, as you will see.
But he was now in a very great hurry indeed.

"Then," said Phaëthon, "let _me_ drive the horses of the Sun for one
whole day!"

       *       *       *       *       *

This put Apollo in terrible alarm, for he knew very well that no hand,
not even a god's, can drive the horses of the Sun but his own. But he
had sworn by Styx--the oath that cannot be broken. All he could do was
to keep the world waiting for sunrise while he showed Phaëthon how to
hold the reins and the whip, and pointed out what course to take, and
warned him of the dangers of the road. "But it's all of no use. You'll
never do it," said he. "Give it up, while there is yet time! You know
not what you do."

"Oh, but I do, though," said Phaëthon. "I know I can. There--I
understand it all now, without another word." So saying, he sprang
into the chariot, seized the reins, and gave the four fiery horses
four lashes that sent them flying like comets through the air.

"Hold them in--hold them hard!" cried Apollo. But Phaëthon was off,
and too far off to hear.

       *       *       *       *       *

Off indeed! and where? The world must have been amazed that day to see
the sun rise like a rocket and go dashing about the sky, north,
south, east, west--anywhere, nowhere, everywhere! Well the horses knew
that it was not Apollo, their master, who plied the whip and held the
reins. They took their bits between their teeth, and--bolted. They
kicked a planet to bits (astronomers know where the pieces are still):
they broke holes in the chariot, which we can see, and call
"sun-spots," to this day: it was as if chaos were come again. At last,
Phaëthon, whose own head was reeling, saw to his horror that the
horses, in their mad rush, were getting nearer and nearer to the earth
itself--and what would happen then? If the wheels touched the globe we
live on, it would be scorched to a cinder. Nearer, nearer, nearer it
came--till a last wild kick broke the traces, overturned the sun
itself, and Phaëthon fell, and fell, and fell, till he fell into the
sea, and was drowned. And then the horses trotted quietly home.

       *       *       *       *       *

The story of Phaëthon is always taken as a warning against being
conceited and self-willed. But there are some curious things about it
still to be told. The Greeks fancied that the great desert of Sahara,
in Africa, is the place where the earth was scorched by the sun's
chariot-wheel, and that the African negroes were burned black in the
same way, and have never got white again. And the poplars are
Phaëthon's sisters, who wept themselves for his death into trees.




DIANA; AND THE STORY OF ORION.


You know that the fixed stars are divided into groups, called
constellations. A name has been given to every constellation; and each
is supposed to be like the shape of some creature or thing--such as
the Great Bear, the Swan, the Cup, the Eagle, the Dragon, and so on.
Most of their names were given by the Greeks, who fancied they could
see in them the shapes after which they were named. We have kept the
old names, and still paint the supposed figure of each constellation
on the celestial globe, which is the image or map of the sky.

Now the grandest, brightest, and largest of all the constellations is
named Orion. It is supposed to represent a giant, with a girdle and a
sword, and is rather more like what is fancied than most of the
constellations are. You are now going to read the story of Orion, and
how he came to be placed among the stars. You may notice, by the way,
that the planets, the sun, and the moon are named after gods and
goddesses; the fixed stars after mortals who were raised to the skies.

There was once a man named Hyrieus, whose wife died, and he loved her
so much, and was so overcome with grief that he vowed never to marry
again. But she left him no children. And when, in course of time, he
grew old, he sadly felt the want of sons and daughters to make his old
age less hard and lonely.

One day it happened that Jupiter, Neptune, and Mercury (who was one of
the gods, and Jupiter's chief minister and messenger) were on a visit
to earth. The night fell, and they grew tired and hungry. So they
wandered on to find rest and food; and, as luck would have it, they
came to the cottage of Hyrieus, and asked for shelter. Hyrieus thought
they were only three poor benighted travelers who had lost their way.
But he was very good and charitable, so he asked them in and gave them
the best fare he had--bread, roots, and wine--he himself waiting upon
them, and trying to make them comfortable. He poured out a cup of
wine, and offered it first to Neptune. But Neptune, instead of
drinking it, rose from his seat and gave the cup to Jupiter, like a
subject to a king who should be first served. You may not think there
was much to notice in this; but Hyrieus noticed it, and then, looking
intently upon the stranger to whom Neptune had given the cup, he was
struck by a sudden religious awe that told him he was in the presence
of the king and father of gods and men. He straightway fell on his
knees and said:--

"I am poor and humble; but I have in my stall one ox to plough my
field. I will gladly offer him up as a sacrifice for joy that Jupiter
has thought me worthy to give him bread and wine."

"You are a good and pious man," said Jupiter. "Ask of us any gift you
please, and it shall be yours."

"My wife is dead," said Hyrieus, "and I have vowed never to marry
again. But let me have a child."

"Take the ox," said Jupiter, "and sacrifice him."

So Hyrieus, being full of faith, sacrificed his ox, and, at the
bidding of Jupiter, buried the skin. And from that skin, and out of
the ground, there grew a child, who was named Orion.

       *       *       *       *       *

Orion grew and grew till he became a giant, of wonderful strength and
splendid beauty. He took the most loving care of Hyrieus, and was the
best of sons to him. But when the old man died, Orion went out into
the world to seek his fortune. And the first service he found was that
of Diana, the sister of Apollo, and queen and goddess of the Moon.

Diana, however, had a great deal to do besides looking after the moon.
She was three goddesses in one--a goddess of the sky, a goddess of
earth, and a goddess of Hades besides. In heaven she was called Luna,
whose duty is to light the world when Apollo is off duty. In Hades she
was called Hecate, who, with her scepter, rules the ghosts of dead
souls. And on earth her name is Diana, the queen, of forests and
mountains, of wild animals and hunters. She wears a crescent on her
forehead and a quiver at her back; her limbs are bare, and she holds a
bow, with which she shoots as well as her brother Apollo. Just as he
is called Phœbus, so she is often called Phœbe. She goes hunting
all night among the hills and woods, attended by the Nymphs and
Oreads, of whom she is queen. There are not so many stories about her
as about the other gods and goddesses, and yet she is really the most
interesting of them all, as you will see some day.

This great strange goddess had sworn never to love or marry--had sworn
it by Styx, I suppose. But Orion was so beautiful and so strong and so
great a hunter that she went as near to loving him as she ever did to
loving any one. She had him always with her, and could never bear him
to leave her. But Orion never thought of becoming the husband of a
goddess, and he fell in love with a mortal princess, the daughter of
Œnopion, King of Chios, an island in the Ægean Sea.

When, however, he asked the king for his daughter, Œnopion was
terribly frightened at the idea of having a giant for his son-in-law.
But he dared not say "No." He answered him:--

"My kingdom is overrun with terrible wild beasts. I will give my
daughter to the man who kills them all." He said this, feeling sure
that any man who tried to kill all the wild beasts in Chios would
himself be killed.

But Orion went out, and killed all the wild beasts in no time, with
his club and his sword. Then Œnopion was still more afraid of him,
and said:--

"You have won my daughter. But, before you marry her, let us drink
together, in honor of this joyful day."

Orion, thinking no harm, went with Œnopion to the sea-shore, where
they sat down and drank together. But Œnopion (whose name means
"The Wine-Drinker") knew a great deal more about what wine will do,
and how to keep sober, than Orion. So before long Orion fell asleep
with the strong Chian wine, which the King had invented; and when
Orion was sound asleep, Œnopion put out both his eyes.

The giant awoke to find himself blind, and did not know what to do or
which way to go. But at last, in the midst of his despair, he heard
the sound of a blacksmith's forge. Guided by the clang, he reached the
place, and prayed the blacksmith to climb up on his shoulders, and so
lend him his eyes to guide him.

The blacksmith consented, and seated himself on the giant's shoulder.
Then said Orion:--

"Guide me to the place where I can see the first sunbeam that rises at
daybreak in the east over the sea."

Orion strode out, and the blacksmith guided him, and at last they came
to the place where the earliest sunbeam first strikes upon human eyes.
It struck upon Orion's, and it gave him back his sight again. Then,
thanking the blacksmith, he plunged into the sea to swim back to
Diana.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now Apollo had long noticed his sister's affection for Orion, and was
very much afraid for fear she should break her vow against love and
marriage. To break an oath would be a horrible thing for a goddess to
do. While Orion was away, making love and killing wild beasts in
Chios, there was no fear; but now he was coming back, there was no
knowing what might happen. So he thought of a trick to get rid of
Orion, and he said:--

"My sister, some people say that you can shoot as well as I can. Now,
of course, that is absurd."

"Why absurd?" asked Diana. "I can shoot quite as well as you."

"We will soon see that," said Apollo. "Do you see that little dark
speck out there, in the sea? I wager that you won't hit it, and that I
can."

"We _will_ see," said Diana. So she drew her bow and shot her arrow
at the little dark speck, that seemed dancing on the waves miles and
miles away. To hit it seemed impossible. But Diana's arrow went true.
The speck was hit--it sank, and rose no more.

It was the head of Orion, who was swimming back to Diana. She had been
tricked into killing him with an arrow from her own bow. All she could
do was to place him among the stars.

       *       *       *       *       *

So her vow was kept; and from that time she never allowed herself to
be seen by a man. Women may see her; but if men see her, they go mad
or die. There is a terrible story of a hunter named Actæon, who once
happened to catch a glimpse of her as she was bathing in a pool. She
instantly turned him into a stag, so that his own dogs fell upon him
and killed him. And another time, when she saw a shepherd named
Endymion on Mount Latmos, and could not help wishing to kiss him for
his beauty, she covered herself with clouds as she stooped, and threw
him into a deep sleep, so that he might not see her face, or know that
he had been kissed by the moon. Only from that hour he became a poet
and a prophet, full of strange fancies; and it is said that every man
becomes a madman or a poet who goes to sleep in the moonlight on the
top of a hill. Diana comes and kisses him in his dreams.




MINERVA; OR, WISDOM.


One day Jupiter had a very bad headache. He had never had one before,
so he did not know what it was or what to do. One god recommended one
thing and another proposed another, and Jupiter tried them all; but
the more things he tried the worse the headache grew. At last he
said:--

"I can't stand this any more. Vulcan, bring your great sledge-hammer
and split open my skull. Kill or cure."

Vulcan brought his sledge-hammer and split open Jupiter's skull with a
single blow. And out there came a fine, full-grown goddess, clad in
complete armor from head to foot, armed with a spear and shield, and
with beautiful large blue eyes. She was Minerva (or, in Greek,
Athene), the Wisdom that comes from Jupiter's brain, and makes it ache
sometimes.

Minerva was wonderfully good as well as wonderfully wise: not that
there is much difference between goodness and wisdom. She is the only
goddess, or god either, who never did a foolish, an unkind, or a
wrong thing. By the way, though, she once took it into her head that
she could play the flute, and the gods laughed at her; but when she
looked into a brook and saw what ugly faces she made when she played,
she knew at once what made the gods laugh, laughed at herself, threw
the flute away, and never played it again; so she was even wise enough
not to be vain, or to think she could do well what she did badly.

The only bad thing about good people is that there are so few good
stories to tell of them. She was Jupiter's favorite daughter, and no
wonder; and she was the only one of all the gods and goddesses whom he
allowed to use his thunder. She was the only one he could trust, I
suppose. She was rather too fond of fighting, considering that she was
a lady, but she was as good at her needle as her sword. She was so
good at spinning, that a woman named Arachne, who was the best spinner
and seamstress in the world, hanged herself in despair because she
could not spin a web so neatly and finely as Minerva. The goddess
turned her into a spider, who is still the finest spinner in the
world, next to Minerva alone.

Once the people of Attica wanted a name for their capital, which they
had just been building. They asked the gods, and the gods in council
decreed that the new city should be named by the god who should give
the most useful new present to mankind. Neptune struck the earth with
his trident, and out sprang the horse, and nobody thought that his
gift could be beaten. But Minerva planted the olive, which is the
plant of peace. So the gods gave the honor of naming the new city to
Minerva, because the emblem of peace is better than the horse, who is
the emblem of war. The name she gave was from her own--Athenæ; and the
city is called Athens to this day. The Athenians always paid their
chief worship to their goddess-godmother.

       *       *       *       *       *

Minerva was very handsome, but rather manly-looking for a goddess, and
grave; her most famous feature was her blue eyes. "The Blue-eyed Maid"
is one of her most usual titles in poetry. She wore a large helmet
with waving plumes; in one hand she held a spear; on her left arm she
carried the shield on which was the head of the Gorgon Medusa, with
living snakes darting from it. But sometimes she carried a distaff
instead of a spear. The olive was of course sacred to her, and her
favorite bird is the owl, who is always called the Bird of Wisdom.




VENUS.


PART I.--THE GOD OF FIRE.

You may remember reading, at the end of the story of "The Gods and the
Giants," that the quarrels of Jupiter and Juno never ceased to disturb
the peace of the sky where the gods dwell. Juno's temper was terrible,
and so was her jealousy, and her pride was beyond all bounds. On the
other hand, her character was without reproach, while Jupiter was the
worst husband in the whole of heaven. To such a pitch did their
quarrels at last reach, that Juno went away to earth, vowing never to
see Jupiter again.

I suppose, however, that Jupiter loved Juno in the depth of his heart,
or else he was afraid of the scandal that would follow upon a
separation between the King and Queen of Heaven. At any rate he
consulted his friends as to how the quarrel could be made up, and was
advised by one of them, King Cithæron of Platæa, to have it announced
that he was about to make some other goddess his queen. On hearing the
news, back flew Juno in a rage to the sky to stop the marriage, and
finding that there was no marriage to stop, consented to remain, and
to forgive her husband once more.

But to quarrel once always makes it easier and easier to quarrel
again, and harder and harder to keep love or friendship alive. And
before long came another quarrel--the worst of all. Juno scolded
furiously, and Jupiter at last said:--

"Enough. You shall destroy the peace of heaven no longer. Out you
shall go."

"All the better," said Juno. "I will go back to earth as I did before.
And I am not going to be tricked by your false stories a second time."

"No," said Jupiter; "the happiness of the earth is as dear to me as
the happiness of the sky. You shall neither go to earth nor stay in
heaven."

Taking a long golden chain, he fastened it round her, under her
shoulders. Then he sent for one of the Cyclopes' anvils, and fastened
it to her feet. Securing the other end of the chain to the keystone of
the rainbow, he let her down, so that Juno hung suspended in mid-air,
neither upon the earth nor in the sky, while the anvil at her feet
prevented her from swinging and from climbing up again by the chain.

It was a terrible position for Juno. Her anger was still at full heat,
and such a degradation, in full sight of gods and men, was a heavy
wound to her pride, not to speak of the bodily pain which she had
helplessly to bear. But she scorned to beg for pardon. So there she
hung, plotting revenge, until night came--till Apollo was asleep under
the sea, and Diana was away hunting, and Jupiter, making the most of
his long-lost quiet, was dozing upon his throne. Then Juno, who
certainly could not sleep with an anvil dragging at her legs and a
chain at her shoulders, heard a whisper from above, "Hush! Don't
start--don't scream; keep quite still, and I'll soon draw your majesty
up again."

Not that Juno had thought of starting or screaming--she was much too
dignified. Besides, the whisper, though rather rough and hoarse, was
very pleasant to hear just then. For she recognized the voice of
Vulcan, her own son, and she knew that he was going to help her.

So she kept quite quiet as she was bidden, and presently she felt
herself, anvil and all, being drawn very slowly upwards, just as you
may have seen a heavy sack drawn up by a machine to a warehouse
window. It must have been rather painful being dragged up while the
anvil dragged her down; but she found herself on firm sky at last, and
sighed with relief when Vulcan, whipping out his knife, cut the cord
at her feet, and let the anvil go thundering down upon the earth
below.

You can fancy what a clatter it made. People started out of their
sleep--not that that mattered. But it did matter that Jupiter started
out of his. He sprang from his throne, and saw at once what had
happened. The next moment, with a tremendous kick, he sent Vulcan
flying after the anvil.

Vulcan fell and fell, spinning through space, till he lost his senses,
and then--

       *       *       *       *       *

The anvil had fallen upon the island of Lemnos, and the islanders,
rushing out of their houses to see what the crash and clatter could be
about, were amazed to see what looked like a confused bundle of legs
and arms tumbling and whirling through the air. As it came nearer, it
seemed to be a human figure. So the people made a sort of network of
their arms, to catch it and prevent its being dashed to pieces.

And lucky it was for Vulcan that they did. For when he came to himself
he found himself with nothing worse the matter than one leg badly
broken.

God though he was, he always remained lame, and he was naturally
somewhat deformed. But neither lameness nor deformity prevented his
having amazing strength; and he was as clever as he was strong. The
people of Lemnos treated him kindly, and he in return taught them to
work in metals. They built him a palace, and he set up forges and
furnaces, and made all sorts of useful and curious things. He used to
work at the forges himself, blowing the fires and wielding the hammer.
Among the curious things he made were two mechanical statues, which
seemed alive, walked about with him, and even helped him in his work.
And at last there came into his head a plan for getting called back
into heaven. So he shut himself up in his smithy with his two
mechanical workmen, and let nobody know what he was doing there. Those
mechanical workmen were among the most useful things he made, for he
could trust them to help him in his most secret work without
understanding it or being able to tell how it was done.

       *       *       *       *       *

One day the gods up in heaven were excited by the arrival of a
splendid golden throne--a present from the earth for Jupiter. How it
came there nobody knew. But there it was, and all agreed that nothing
so magnificent in its way had ever been seen before, even in the
skies. Jupiter was about to try how it felt to sit upon, when Juno,
jealous even of that, went quickly before him and seated herself.

"Ah! that _is_ a comfortable throne!" she exclaimed. "There is nothing
like gold to sit upon, after all."

Jupiter was annoyed with Juno's behavior, as indeed he was with most
things she did. As, however, he did not like to make another scene
before all the gods and goddesses, he waited patiently for her to get
up again. But she did not move.

At last--"I think that is _my_ throne," he hinted, in a tone which
seemed gentle, but which Juno understood exceedingly well. Still she
did not move.

"Thrones are not meant to go to sleep upon," he said in a yet more
meaning way.

And still she did not move.

"Get up!" he thundered at last, his patience gone.

"I can't!" was all she could say, as she made a vain effort to rise.
"The throne is holding me with its arms!"

And so it proved. Juno was held so tightly by the throne that she
could scarcely struggle. It was very strange. And presently it became
stranger still. Neither the authority of Jupiter, nor all the strength
and skill of all Olympus together, could loosen the clutch of the
magic throne.

"Ah!" said Mercury--who, you may remember, was Jupiter's chief
messenger, and the quickest and cleverest of all the gods--"if only
Vulcan were here! He understands these things."

"And why is he not here?" asked Jupiter, sternly.

But nobody dared answer, though everybody knew. However, Mercury took
the hint, vanished for an instant or two, and, while the gods were
vainly tugging at the arms of the throne, reappeared, followed by a
limping figure all black and hot from the forge--in short, by Vulcan.

"What is the matter?" asked Vulcan, as innocently as if he had nothing
to do with it at all. "Ah! I see. A clever invention; but--By the way,
I can't afford another broken leg: so if I help my mother _this_
time--"

Seeing from the face of Jupiter that he had nothing to fear, he
pressed the tip of his grimy finger upon a secret spring--the arms
instantly opened, and Juno was free. What they did with the throne I
cannot tell you; but you may be certain that nobody ever sat on it
again.

After that, Vulcan remained among the gods as the god of Fire, and was
the chief blacksmith of nature. He opened vast forges in the middle of
the earth, where he made weapons and armor for gods and heroes, and
thunderbolts for Jupiter. The Cyclopes, the giants with one eye in the
middle of their foreheads, were his workmen. The chimneys of his
furnaces are called volcanoes, of which the chief is Mount Ætna in the
island of Sicily; and one can tell when some great work is going on by
the smoke and flame that bursts out of these. Volcano, you will no
doubt notice, is very nearly the same word as Vulcan.

       *       *       *       *       *

And so things went on quietly till one day a very wonderful thing
happened. Nobody has ever been able to account for it or understand
it; so I must just tell you the story as it stands. One lovely spring
morning, when there was scarcely the softest breeze to stir the sea,
shining like a mirror in the sun, a light amber-colored froth that
floated upon the ripples was seen, by watchers upon the shore of the
island of Cyprus, to gather into a delicate rosy cloud that presently
began to tremble as if it were trying to be alive. It still rested
lightly upon the water--so lightly that the breeze, soft and gentle as
it was, might have blown it away; but its delicate trembling carried
it upwards till at last it seemed to breathe, then to take shape, and
at last blossomed into the most beautiful woman--if woman it was--that
had ever been seen in the world, or even in heaven. With wonderful
grace she glided to the shore; and poets have told how the zephyrs, or
soft west winds, guided her as she came, and the four seasons received
her on the shore. The people of Cyprus could only wonder and worship;
and this was the birth of the great goddess Venus, the Queen of Love,
whom the Greeks called Aphrodite, which means born of the Foam of the
Sea.

And this wonderful goddess of Love and Beauty Jupiter chose to give in
marriage to Vulcan, the deformed and limping god of Fire.


PART II.--LOVE AND THE SOUL; OR, THE STORY OF CUPID AND PSYCHE.

The fact was, that Jupiter himself had fallen in love with the
beautiful new goddess. But she would have nothing to say to him: and
so, just out of anger and revenge, he ordered her to marry Vulcan,
because he was ugly, deformed, and always black with working at his
forges.

Altogether it was an unlucky day when Venus came into the sky. Her
beauty turned the heads of the gods, and filled the goddesses with
envy and jealousy. But all that mattered nothing to her, for she had a
magic zone, or girdle, called "Cestus" in Latin: and whenever she put
it on she became so irresistibly charming that everybody forgave her
everything. Not only the gods, but men also, became her lovers, her
own favorite among them all being Mars, the god of War--a cruel and
savage god, very unlike the rest, delighting in battle and slaughter.
Then, on earth, she tried her best to make a very handsome young
prince named Adonis fall in love with her. But he--strange to
say--cared nothing for her. The only thing he cared for in the world
was hunting: he scorned everything else, Venus included. Still, in
spite of his scorn for her, she mourned for him miserably when he was
killed by a wild boar. She changed him into the flower called Anemone,
so that she might still find him upon earth: though some people say
her grief was such that Death took pity on her, and allowed him to
come to life again for six months at a time every year. This might
mean that Adonis is only another name for the beauty of the earth,
which comes to life for the six months of spring and summer, and dies
for the six months of autumn and winter. For most of these stories
have some sort of meaning.

       *       *       *       *       *

Venus had a child, named Cupid, which means love. You must often have
seen pictures and statues of him--a very beautiful boy, with wings,
carrying a bow and arrows. They were magic arrows. For if any man was
pricked by one of their points, he fell in love with the first woman
he saw: or a woman, in like manner, with the first man. And as Cupid
was exceedingly mischievous, and fond of aiming his arrows at people
for his own amusement, the wrong women were always falling in love
with the wrong men, and the wrong men with the wrong women: and so a
great deal of fresh trouble came into the world, as if there had not
been enough before, without the mischievous tricks of Cupid.
Sometimes he went about blindfolded, shooting his arrows about at
random: and then, of course, the confusion was worse than ever. It has
been said that the bandage over his eyes means that love is blind to
faults. But he does not always wear the bandage: and when he does, I
believe it is only when he does not choose to see.

Now in a certain city there lived a king and queen, who had three
beautiful daughters. The name of the youngest was Psyche, and she was
the most beautiful of all. So beautiful and so charming was she that
the people worshiped her as a goddess, instead of Venus. This made
Venus very angry indeed, that a mortal girl should receive the honor
and worship due to the goddess of Beauty. So, in her jealous wrath,
she said to Cupid:--

"Do you see that girl yonder? I order you, as your mother, to make her
fall in love with the very meanest of mankind--one so degraded that he
cannot find his equal in wretchedness throughout the whole wide
world."

Psyche's elder sisters were both married to kings; but she herself was
so marvelously beautiful that no mere mortal dared to ask for her in
marriage. This distressed the king, her father, greatly: for it was
thought dishonorable for a princess not to marry. So he consulted the
oracle of Apollo--an "oracle" being a place where a god's voice
answered questions. And the voice answered him thus:--

    "On a cliff the maiden place:
      Deck her as you deck the dead.
    None that is of mortal race
      Shall so fair a maiden wed.
    But a being dread and dire,
      Feared by earth, by heaven abhorred,
    Breathing venom, sword, and fire--
      He shall be the lady's lord."

This answer made the king more unhappy than ever at the thought of
having to give his favorite daughter to be devoured by some terrible
monster. However, the oracle had to be obeyed, and the whole city gave
itself up to mourning for many days. Then at last a funeral procession
set out to conduct the poor princess to her doom. Her father and
mother were distracted with grief, and Psyche alone showed
cheerfulness and courage, doing all she could to comfort them, and to
make them resigned to the will of heaven.

When the procession reached the highest peak of a neighboring
mountain, it returned to the city, and Psyche was left there all
alone. Then her courage left her, and she threw herself upon the rock
all trembling and weeping. But suddenly, in the midst of her distress,
she was gently lifted up by the wind, and as gently let down upon the
soft turf of a secret valley in the very heart of the hill.

It was a very delightful place, and Psyche fell pleasantly asleep.
When she woke she saw a grove, with a fountain of water as clear as
crystal, and near the fountain was a splendid palace, built of gold,
cedar, and ivory, and paved with precious stones. Psyche approached it
timidly, and presently found courage to enter. The beauty of the
chambers lured her on and on, until at last she was fairly bewildered
with admiration. All the wealth and beauty of the world seemed
collected in this wonderful palace, and all without a lock or a chain
to guard them.

Suddenly, in the midst of her wonder, she heard a musical voice,
saying:--

    "Lady, wonder not nor fear;
    All is thine thou findest here.
    On yon couch let slumber bless thee,
    Hands unseen shall bathe and dress thee,
    Bring thee meat and pour thee wine--
    Thine are we, and all is thine."

She looked round, but saw nobody. However, she saw the couch, and,
being very tired with wandering about the palace and seeing so many
wonders, lay down upon it and soon fell asleep. When quite rested, she
rose and took a bath, being waited upon by invisible hands. Then she
saw dishes of all sorts of dainties, and cups of wine, carried
apparently without hands to a table, at which, being by this time
exceedingly hungry, she sat down and made a delicious meal, attended
by voices for servants. When she had finished eating, another voice
sang to an invisible harp, and this performance was followed by a full
chorus of such music as is only heard in heaven. And so at last the
darkness of night came on.

Then she heard a voice, different from all the rest, whisper close in
her ear:--

"I am your husband, Psyche, of whom the oracle foretold. This my
palace, with all its delight, is yours, and I shall make you very
happy. But you must obey me in two things. You must never see your
father or your mother or your sisters again, and you must never seek
to see me at all. If you promise this, I swear to you that no harm
shall befall your kindred, and that you shall be happy forever."

The whisper was strangely sweet and gentle for a terrible monster's.
Indeed, it was so loving and so tender that she forgot even to
tremble. It went to her heart, and she could only whisper back:--

"I promise you."

       *       *       *       *       *

Thenceforth Psyche lived in the palace, every day bringing her fresh
surprises and pleasures, the voices keeping her company, and
delighting her with their marvelous music. And as soon as it became
too dark for her to see him, the lord of the palace, her husband,
came to her and stayed with her till nearly daybreak, until at last
she forgot everything except how good he was to her, and how much she
had learned to love him. It did not even trouble her that she had
never seen him, for she thought of nothing but pleasing him and
obeying his commands.

But one day Psyche's sisters, having heard of her fate, and having
come all the way from their husbands' kingdoms to learn all about it,
climbed together to the top of the mountain-peak to see if they could
find any traces of her. Finding none, they wept and beat their breasts
till the rocks resounded with their cries. Nay, their lamentations
reached the palace itself; and Psyche, who loved her sisters, ran,
forgetful of her promise, to the foot of the mountain, whence she saw
them above mourning for her in an agony of woe.

The sight of their grief was too much for Psyche: it seemed so cruel
that her sisters should mourn for her as dead while all the while she
was alive and happy. Surely the husband who loved her so much did not
mean the promise to prevent her from putting their hearts at ease. So
she gave a command, and forthwith the invisible hands lifted her
sisters, and carried them down safely into the secret valley.

Imagine their surprise! But imagine it still more when their lost
sister, after embracing them, led them into her palace, showed them
her treasures, entertained them with invisible concerts, and feasted
them sumptuously.

"And the lord, your husband," asked the eldest sister at last, "what
manner of man may he be? And does he use you well and make you happy?"

The sudden question took Psyche aback. It seemed so strange to have to
answer that she had never seen the face of her husband--that she no
more knew what he was like than they. So, to avert their curiosity,
she said:--

"He is an excellent husband and makes me very happy indeed--a handsome
young man, who has not yet grown a beard: he spends his days in
hunting among the mountains, or no doubt you would have seen him....
But it is time for us to part, my sisters, or it will be dark before
you get home."

So, loading them with jewels and golden ornaments, she embraced them,
and, calling the invisible hands, had them conveyed safely back to the
top of the mountain.

Whether the sisters had been honest in their mourning for Psyche I
cannot tell: though I think they made more noise about it than people
make who really and truly grieve. Anyhow, they were now filled with
envy of Psyche's wealth and happiness.

"To think of my being married to a bald, miserly old man," said the
eldest sister on their way home, "while that minx has a handsome young
husband who squanders untold wealth upon her! And how proud she has
grown! Why, she spoke to us as if we were her slaves."

"And to think," said the second sister, "of my being married to a
gouty cripple! You may take things patiently, sister, and put up with
her airs: but not I. I propose that we hit on some plan to take down
her pride."

So they hid the presents that Psyche had given them, redoubled their
cries and groans, told their father and mother that Psyche had
certainly been devoured, and returned to their own kingdoms for a
while. But only for a while. Having arranged a plan, they returned to
the top of the mountain: and in such a hurry were they to revisit
Psyche that they leapt into the valley and would have come down with
broken necks had not a passing breeze, who recognized them as Psyche's
sisters, caught them and made their fall easy. Psyche could not help
being glad to see them again, for she loved them very dearly, and, in
spite of her happiness, hungered for news from home.

After she had entertained them as before:--

"By the way," asked the eldest sister, "the lord, your husband--what
manner of man is he? You told us; but I have forgotten."

And so had poor Psyche forgotten what she had told them. So she said,
this time:--

"He is a middle-aged man, with a big beard, and a few gray hairs
sprinkled here and there. He is a merchant, and travels into distant
countries, or no doubt he would have been here to give you welcome."

"Oh, you poor innocent!" said the sister. "As if he could be young and
middle-aged, bearded and beardless, a merchant and a hunter! It's
plain you've never seen that husband of yours, and no wonder he
wouldn't let you. For _we_ have--we, who spend our lives in watching
over your interests," she went on, squeezing out a hypocritical tear.
"Your husband is an enormous dragon, with many folds and coils, a neck
swollen with poison, and huge gaping jaws. Think of the oracle, you
poor, dear, deluded girl. He is only feeding you up with delicacies in
order to eat you. Well--if you like the prospect, _we_ have done _our_
duty. And when you are eaten up, you won't be able to say _we_ didn't
tell you so."

Psyche was aghast with dismay. She trusted her sisters: there was the
oracle: and it was certainly mysterious that her husband had never
allowed her to look upon him.

"Oh! what _shall_ I do?" she cried.

"Do? Why, there's only one thing to do. We have thought it all out for
you. Here is a lamp. Light it and hide it under a piece of tapestry.
When the monster sleeps, uncover the lamp, and throw the light full
upon him. Then take this knife, which has been well sharpened, and
sever his head from his body. Thus the world will be freed from a
curse, and you will be saved."

Thereupon they left her. And how shall Psyche's feelings be described?
Was it possible she was the wife of a horrible dragon? Promise or no
promise, that she must know. So she hid the lighted lamp, as directed.
The night came and her husband with it. When he had fallen into a deep
sleep, Psyche, with naked feet, crept noiselessly across the floor,
drew off the tapestry, and flooded the room with light, and she saw--

A dragon? No--Cupid himself, asleep in all his beauty, with folded
wings, and his bow and arrows by his side.

She hung over him in love and wonder. Alas! a drop of oil from the
lamp fell upon him, and scalded his shoulder. He woke, cast a look of
reproach and sorrow upon poor faithless Psyche, seized his bow and
arrows, spread his wings, and flew. She, overwhelmed with penitence
for her disobedience and distrust, and desperate at the thought of
losing him, clung with both hands to one of his feet, and was thus
carried through the window and far away through the night till her
strength failed her and she fell fainting to the ground.

When she came to her senses, she found herself on the bank of a
river, and, in her despair, threw herself into the stream. But the
river took pity on her, and carried her into a bed of reeds, to whom
the god Pan was giving a music-lesson. Pan told her how foolish she
was to think she could mend matters by killing herself, and advised
patience, which was none the worse counsel for being easy to preach
and difficult to follow. However, he was very kind, so she thanked
him, and wandered out into the world, hoping that she might meet Cupid
some day, and beg him to forgive her.

       *       *       *       *       *

Meanwhile Cupid lay tossing and groaning in his bed in his mother's
palace, for his scalded shoulder gave him great pain. Venus wondered
what could possibly have happened, for all her questioning could get
nothing from him but moans. And maybe she would never have known, had
not a sea-gull come to her with a whole budget of scandal: among the
rest, how Cupid was carrying on a love affair with a mortal. And when
the gull told her that the girl's name was said to be Psyche, the rage
of the goddess knew no bounds. She hurried to Cupid's bedside, and
gave him such a scolding that he must have forgotten the pain of the
scald. Then she went, still storming, to Juno, and demanded the
instant arrest and punishment of Psyche. From Juno she went to Jupiter
himself, who put Mercury at her service. Mercury received from her a
little book in which was written the name and description of Psyche,
and with this he went about the world, proclaiming that whoever should
seize a certain princess of that name, an escaped handmaid of Venus,
should receive seven kisses from the goddess herself for a reward.

Knowing nothing of all this, Psyche wandered on and on till she saw a
temple on the top of a mountain. She thought it might be the dwelling
of Cupid, so she climbed up to it and found it littered with sheaves
of corn, bound and unbound, scythes, sickles, and such things, all
lying about in confusion. Shocked at finding a temple in such a state,
she set to work to put everything in order. She was in the middle of
her work, when a beautiful lady appeared before her, crowned with a
wreath of wheat ears, whom she knew to be Ceres, the goddess of
harvest.

"Who are you?" said the goddess graciously, "who work so hard to put
the floor of my house in order?"

"Psyche," said she; "and I implore you, great goddess, to grant me
shelter for a few days. I will serve you faithfully and well."

But when the goddess heard the name of Psyche, her face changed.
"Willingly would I shelter you," said she. "But I dare not shelter one
whom the wrath of Venus is following through earth and air. Begone!
and be thankful that I do not keep you as a prisoner. Not even I dare
offend Venus. My poor girl! I am sorry for you. But begone!"

Turned away by the kindest of all the goddesses, Psyche wandered on
and on till she came to another temple in a gloomy valley, which
proved to be the temple of Juno, to whom Psyche, falling on her knees
before the altar, prayed for succour. But Juno, appearing to her,
said:--

"Willingly would I help you; but though I am the Queen of Heaven, I
must obey the law. Venus claims you as her handmaid, and nobody may
give protection to a fugitive slave. Be thankful that I do not deliver
you to your mistress. I pity you; but begone!"

So not even the greatest of all the goddesses could help her against
the vengeance of Venus. Again she wandered on and on, helpless and
despairing, till one of the servants of Venus met her and knew her.
Seizing Psyche by the hair, she dragged her into the presence of the
terribly beautiful goddess, who broke into a laugh of cruel triumph
when she found her rival in her power. Venus delivered her over to her
torturers, Anguish and Sorrow. They, having scourged and tormented
her, brought her again before Venus, who flew at her like a fury, as
if she would tear her limb from limb.

"You ugly slave!" said Venus, as soon as she recovered breath; "you
want a lover, do you? Well, perhaps you may get one if you know how
to drudge; you certainly won't any other way. I'll give you a trial."

So she took wheat, barley, millet, poppy seed, vetches, lentils, and
beans, mixed them up together, and said:--

"Sort out every seed into its proper heap before evening. If you can
do that, you shall not be scourged again."

Psyche sat down before her task in silent despair, crushed in heart,
and aching in every limb. She could only pray that death would come to
her before nightfall; for she could not bear the thought of those
cruel scourges. And so she sat motionless until a little white ant,
taking more pity on her than Ceres or Juno, called together his whole
tribe, who sorted out the heap, grain by grain, into proper parcels,
in no time, and then ran away.

Judge of the surprise of Venus when she found the work done. "Somebody
has helped you!" said she. But she could not order her to be scourged,
the work being done; so she threw her a piece of coarse bread for
supper, and had her shut up in a wretched shed till day.

In the morning Venus came to her again. "Do you see yonder sheep, with
golden fleeces, wandering without a shepherd? Go and bring me a piece
of their wool, that you may escape another scourging."

Psyche set out, not to get the wool, but to drown herself in the
river that ran along the meadow where the sheep were feeding. She was
about to leap into the water, when one of the reeds spoke to her, and
said, murmuring:--

"Pollute not these pure waters by thy death, nor yet venture to
approach yonder sheep during the heat of the sun; for they are fierce
and savage, and they will slay thee with their horns. But when they
are resting towards evening, creep into the meadow, and collect the
wool that has clung to the bushes."

Thus Psyche brought to Venus a whole lapful of golden wool. "Somebody
has helped you!" again said the goddess, angrily. But she had to keep
her word.

Still she could not bring herself to believe that Psyche could have
performed these tasks unaided. She strongly suspected Cupid, though
she kept him closely shut up in his chamber, making believe that his
scalded shoulder still wanted careful nursing, for fear lest he might
come across Psyche. She was quite sure he had never left his chamber
for a moment. Nevertheless she resolved to send Psyche next time where
not Love himself could follow or help her.

"Do you see yonder mountain-peak?" she said to her next morning. "From
that peak falls a black fountain, as cold as ice. Take this urn, fill
it with the cold black water, and bring it to me."

Psyche started off at once for the mountain-peak, meaning to throw
herself from it, and so bring her miseries to an end. But it was not
so easy to reach the top as she had hoped. The black fountain fell
headlong from the middle of a terrible rock into a still more dark and
terrible ravine, from which fierce and horrible dragons stretched up
their long necks to guard the waters; and the roar of the water as it
fell was this--"Begone, or perish!"

In the midst of her terror, an eagle came flying overhead, and called
out to her:--

"Do not touch the water: this is the spring of the Styx, that sacred
and dreadful river by whom the gods swear. Give _me_ your urn."

So, swooping down, he took the urn in his talons, and flew with it
through the gaping jaws of the dragons so swiftly that they had not
time to close upon him, or to pierce him with their fiery tongues.
Thus he reached the water, filled the urn, and flew back with it to
Psyche, who brought it to Venus just as she had been bidden.

Venus was more enraged than ever; but this time she hid her anger with
a smile. "I see there is nothing too hard for you," she
said--"nothing. So do me one little service before we make friends.
Nobody else could do it; but then one who is clever enough to steal
the waters of the Styx can do everything. You see I have grown pale
and thin with anxiety about my poor boy. Go as quickly as you can to
the palace of King Pluto, and ask to see the Lady Proserpine. When you
see her, say to her, 'Madam, Venus requests you to lend her a little
of your beauty till to-morrow morning.' Here is a casket to bring it
in; and be quick with your errand."

Then indeed did Psyche give herself up for lost. For she knew what you
have read in the story of the Gods and the Giants--that Pluto was the
King of Hades, that underground world of ghosts and spirits where men
and women go when they die. And of this world of Hades the Lady
Proserpine was queen.

Thinking that the shortest way to the world below was the best, she
went to the top of a high tower, meaning to hurl herself out of life
headlong. But the tower said:--

"Pause! for know that from the world where you are going none ever
return. There is only one path by which you can reach Pluto's palace
and come back again; and that path I will tell you. Listen carefully
to all I say. Near to the city of Lacedæmon is a hill called Tænarus.
In the hill is hidden a cavern which you must find; and from this
cavern a path, which no mortal has yet trodden, runs straight into the
hill. Take the path, but provide yourself first with these things: two
pieces of barley-bread sopped in honey--one in each hand--and two
pieces of money in your mouth. If anybody accosts you on the way, pass
him by in silence. Give nothing to anybody with your hand. Show no
pity. Help nobody. Taste nothing but dry bread, and open not the box
you carry; for Venus knows you to be pitiful and helpful, and a little
inquisitive as well, and will set traps for you to fall into.
Therefore, be wise, and trust to nothing you see in the world of
dreams and shadows. If you follow my directions, you may go and return
in safety; if you fail in the least of them, you are a lost soul."

Psyche set off at once to the city of Lacedæmon, and, with a honey-sop
in each hand and two silver coins in her mouth, sought for the cavern
in the hill. She found it at last, and started along the path, blacker
than night, which wound downwards into the heart of the earth. After
she had traveled many hours, the path became illuminated with a pale
twilight, by which she could just manage to see--a strange sort of
half-light, such as one never sees above ground. It seemed to Psyche
as if the path would never end. At last she saw figures approaching
her in the distance; and these, as they approached, proved to be a
lame man driving a lame ass laden with wood, which was slipping from
its cords.

"Lady," said the lame man, "you see I am weak and helpless; help me to
tie up my wood again so that it may not fall."

Psyche was just about to lay down her honey-sops and help him, when
she remembered the tower's warning, and passed him by without a word.

On she went until she came to the bank of a broad river with water as
black as ink; and just where the path ran down to the water was a
ferry-boat, in which sat a very old man naked to the waist, and
holding an oar. Psyche stepped into the boat, and the old man, in dead
silence, pushed off, and began to row heavily across the black and
sluggish stream. When the boat reached the middle, she looked down,
and saw a skinny hand raise itself slowly out of the water. Then she
perceived that the hand belonged to a corpse-like form floating half
under the black ooze, which, in a hollow voice, thus besought her:--

"Lady, for pity's sake take me into your boat, that I may reach the
other side. Else must I float here between life and death forever."

Psyche was about to bid the ferryman take the poor, half-dead creature
into the boat, when she remembered the tower's warning against pity,
and let the body drift by.

Arrived at the other side, the ferryman held out his hand for his fee.
Psyche was about to take one of the coins from her mouth, when she
suddenly remembered the tower's warning to give nothing to anybody
with her hand. So, bringing one of the coins between her teeth, she
dropped it into the open palm of the ferryman, and went her way.

A little farther on she came upon some old women weaving.

"Lady," said the eldest, "we are old, and it is dark, and our eyes are
dim, and we have much to do before nightfall. Help us with our web, we
pray you."

Psyche was about to comply, when she remembered the tower's warning
against giving help, and passed on.

Still on and on she went until she reached a huge palace built of
black marble, which she knew at once to be the abode of Pluto and
Proserpine. But how was she to enter? For on the threshold stood a
monstrous dog, with three heads and six flaming eyes, barking
thunderously, and with horrible yawning jaws. This was the dog
Cerberus, who never sleeps, and guards the palace of Pluto night and
day. There was only one chance of passing him, and Psyche took it. She
threw him one of her honey-sops, and ran past him while he was
swallowing it down.

In the hall beyond the threshold sat Proserpine, Queen of Hades, and
goddess of the Underworld, dark and beautiful, and crowned with white
poppies and stars, with a two-pronged scepter in her hand. She
received Psyche kindly, made her sit down on a cushion beside her, and
bade the attendants bring meat, fruit, and wine. Psyche, hungry and
thirsty after her long journey, was about to eat, when she remembered
the tower's warning, and refreshed herself with a little dry bread
only. Then rising, she said to Proserpine:--

"Madam, Venus requests you to lend her a little of your beauty till
to-morrow morning, and here is a casket for me to carry it in."

"With pleasure," said Proserpine, taking the casket, opening it,
breathing into it, closing it again, and returning it to Psyche, who,
having performed her errand, departed reverently.

She got past Cerberus by throwing him her other sop, and gave the
ferryman her other piece of money to row her back across the river.
And so, without further peril or adventure, she reached the cavern in
the hill, and the sunshine, and the broad light of day, with the
casketful of beauty safe in her hand.

Then a great curiosity came upon her to know what this beauty of the
Underworld might be--beauty so great that even Venus desired it to add
to her charms. At last Psyche's curiosity grew so strong that she
could withstand it no longer, and the tower's last warning was
forgotten. What harm could a single glimpse do? So, first timidly,
then more boldly, she raised the lid of the casket. And from the
casket into which Proserpine had breathed there came forth a deep
sleep, which fell over Psyche, so that first she felt faint, then her
blood turned dull and cold, and the color left her cheeks, then her
heart stopped, and then her breath,--for the Sleep of Death had come
upon her, and she lay in the sunshine, pale and cold. For Death is the
beauty of Proserpine.

       *       *       *       *       *

Cupid, wearied out of patience by being kept prisoner in his chamber
on account of a trifling hurt that no longer pained him, and loving
his lost Psyche as much as ever, thought and thought how he might
escape from the tiresome watchfulness of his mother. And it happened
at last that the nurse on duty threw open the window for a moment to
let in a breath of air. That moment was enough for Cupid: spreading
his wings, he was through the window and away before the nurse could
tell him from a bird. His wings had grown the stronger from their long
rest, and he reveled in the freedom of the sunshine and the open air.
Never had life felt so full of joy. Ah, if he could only find Psyche,
not his mother herself should part them any more! And surely he would
find her, for what cannot Love find or do?

He fled fast to the palace in the secret valley, but she was not
there. There was scarce a corner of the world where he did not fly, in
less time than it would take the very swiftest of birds. And at last--

He found her; and his wings lost their strength, and his heart melted
for sorrow when he saw her stretched in the Sleep of Death upon the
hillside--beautiful still, but with the beauty of Proserpine. The
fatal casket lay open beside her, so he knew what had befallen.
"Alas!" he thought, "if I had not flown from her in my anger she would
not have died." He clasped her in his arms; he kissed her lips with
enough love to wake the dead, if such a thing could be.

And such a thing could be--such a thing was! For at the kiss of Love
the Sleep of Death began to slowly pass away. Back came the color to
her lips and cheeks; her heart fluttered and beat; she breathed; she
opened her eyes. And then she woke in his arms, glad and alive.

This is the story of Cupid and Psyche, of which there is nothing more
to tell except that Psyche's troubles had a very happy and glorious
ending indeed. For Jupiter, to make her a fitting wife for Cupid,
received her into heaven, and on her arrival gave her with his own
hands a goblet of nectar to drink--the wine of the gods, which makes
all who taste of it immortal. Even Venus became reconciled to her, and
the wedding-feast of Cupid and Psyche is one of the most famous
festivals in the whole history of the skies.

       *       *       *       *       *

I said a little way back that most of these stories have some sort of
meaning, and people have found more meaning in the story of Psyche
than in most of them. "Psyche" is the Greek for "soul," and I have
already told you that "Cupid" means "love." So the story may show how
the soul of man is loved by heaven; but how it has to pass through
many sufferings and trials, and at last through death, before it
reaches immortal happiness.

"Psyche" also means "butterfly," and Psyche herself, after she was
received into heaven, always appears in pictures with a butterfly's
wings. It seems curious at first that the same word means "soul" and
"butterfly"; but it is not so curious when one thinks a little of the
story. Just as the caterpillar that crawls on the earth seems to die
when it becomes a chrysalis and then rises again as a winged
butterfly, so man, bound down to earth like a caterpillar, seems to
die, and then lives again, only changed.

In some very old pictures you may see a butterfly flying out from
between a man's lips. That means that he is dying, and that his
"Psyche," his "soul" or "butterfly," is leaving him.




MERCURY AND IRIS.


Very often, in these stories, you have met with Mercury, and have
heard that he was Jupiter's chief messenger. The office he held made
him so busy with all the affairs of heaven, earth, and Hades, that
there is scarcely a story without Mercury in it; and it is therefore
time to know something more about him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now you must know that the people who, ages ago, made these stories
about the gods and goddesses in whom they believed, thought that the
earth (which you know to be a globe) was a large island surrounded by
a boundless ocean. The sky--so they imagined--was a solid dome, on
which the sun, moon, and stars made their various journeys. Every
morning Phœbus drove the chariot of the Sun forth from the stable
beyond the ocean in the east, across the blue dome, till it sank
beyond the western ocean, and then passed underground back to the
eastern stable, so as to be ready to start again. The Moon, that is to
say, the chariot of Diana, also had her proper course across the dome,
and so had every planet and star. And this dome, or sky, with all its
wonders, was supported on the shoulders of Atlas, a gigantic Titan,
condemned to this task (some say) for having helped the giants in
their war against the gods.

This Atlas was a great king, and his kingdom stretched westward till
it touched the ocean which surrounds the earth. And that is why this
part of the sea is called the Ocean of Atlas, or Atlantic Ocean. The
name of his kingdom was Mauritania, now called Morocco, where he owned
a thousand flocks, and orchards with apples of gold. And he had seven
beautiful daughters, whose names were Alcyone, Asterope, Celæno,
Electra, Maia, Merope, and Taygeta. Six of these married gods; Merope
alone married a mortal. After their death they were honored by being
set as stars in the sky, where you may often see the seven sisters
clustered together in a beautiful constellation called the Pleiades.
But it is very difficult to see Merope, because she married a mortal
instead of a god, and therefore shines dimly. If you can see more than
six of the seven sisters you have good eyes.

Of all the Pleiades Maia is the brightest, for she was chosen by
Jupiter. She had a son named Mercury, and a promising child he must
have been. For on the very day he was born he stole the oxen of King
Admetus of Thessaly, although (as you may remember) Apollo himself was
then the king's herdsman. And Mercury not only stole the oxen, but ran
away with Apollo's quiver of arrows. Proud of this feat, he stole the
zone of Venus, the sword of Mars, and the hammer of Vulcan; and at
last he carried off the very scepter of Jupiter. Instead of punishing
him, however, Jupiter was so delighted with his cleverness and
impudence that he made Mercury his chief messenger and cup-bearer. He
also gave him a winged cap, wings for his heels, a short sword, and a
scepter called _caduceus_--a rod round which two living serpents
coiled. The winged cap was called _petasus_, and whenever he put it on
he became invisible; the wings for his heels were called _talaria_,
and made him able to fly faster than lightning to any place he
pleased. The _caduceus_ was a magic wand. It first belonged to Apollo,
who used to drive the flocks of King Admetus with it. But when Mercury
invented the lyre, he gave the lyre to Apollo in exchange for the
_caduceus_. The lyre became Apollo's favorite instrument, and Mercury
used the _caduceus_ to drive the flocks of dead souls to Hades, for
that was one of his duties. He could also send people to sleep with
it, and could bring back the dead to life by touching them with its
point. You will always know a picture or statue of Mercury from his
_caduceus_, and from the wings on his cap and heels.

He needed to be quick, active, and clever, for he had a great deal to
do--so much that Jupiter relieved him of the office of cup-bearer and
gave it to a young Phrygian shepherd, named Ganymede. This is what
Mercury had to do. He had to carry all Jupiter's messages, which, of
course, obliged him to be almost everywhere at once; he had to see
that the laws of the great council of the gods were properly carried
out; to keep Jupiter's secrets; to know everything that was going on
all over the world; to conduct the souls of the dead to Hades--each
one of which things was enough, one would think, to take up his whole
time. However, he managed to do it all, and a great deal more, and was
not very particular how. For it must be owned that Mercury, though a
god, was not above lying and cheating whenever it suited his purpose.
He was wonderfully eloquent, and could make anybody believe anything.
And he was the patron, that is to say, the friend and protector, of
merchants, travelers, orators, and thieves.

       *       *       *       *       *

Juno also had a chief messenger--a goddess named Iris. The path of
Iris from heaven to earth and back again is the rainbow; so whenever
you see a rainbow you may know that Iris is bringing a message down
from Juno. Indeed "Iris" means "Rainbow."

       *       *       *       *       *

I ought to tell you that the planet nearest to the sun is called
Mercury, and that Mercury is another name for the metal quicksilver.




NEPTUNE.


If you look back at the second of these stories--that of Jupiter and
Juno--you will read that "when Jupiter became god and king of the
whole world, he made his two brothers, Neptune and Pluto, kings under
him. He made Neptune god and king of the sea: Pluto he made god and
king of Hades." You will read the story of Pluto presently. This is
about Neptune, of whom there is much less to say. You have already
read, in the story of Minerva, how Neptune contended with the goddess
of Wisdom for the honor of naming the capital of Attica, and how he
produced the first horse by striking the earth with his
_trident_--that is to say, with his scepter in the shape of a fork
with three prongs, by which he may always be known. You will remember
that the honor was given to Minerva, because she produced the olive,
the emblem of peace, and therefore better for mankind than the horse,
the emblem of war. This decision, however, did not satisfy Neptune. So
when the people of Argolis also built a capital city, he disputed with
Minerva for the honor of naming that. Jupiter, however, settled the
matter by giving it a name which had nothing to do with either god or
goddess--that is to say, Trœzene--and by making Minerva its
patroness and Neptune its patron. But this did not please Neptune
either. He wanted to have some city or piece of dry land all to
himself, which was natural enough for a god who had nothing of his own
but the sea. So he went to law with Apollo for the possession of the
isthmus of Corinth. The case was tried before Briareus, the Cyclops
with fifty heads and a hundred hands, as judge. Briareus decided that
Neptune should have the isthmus, all except a certain headland, which
was given to Apollo.

But Neptune was not even yet satisfied. What was the sea and one
little isthmus when Jupiter had all earth and air and sky, and when
Pluto had the still greater world below? Then Jupiter ruled over the
immortal gods and living men and women, and Pluto over all the dead;
but Neptune had neither gods nor men, dead or alive, for
subjects--only fishes and sea-monsters, creatures really not worth the
ruling. It is true he had all sorts of treasures got from shipwrecks;
but what is the good of gold and jewels at the bottom of the sea? And
he had many wonderful and beautiful things belonging to him by
nature--pearls, and sea-weed, and coral, and amber; but he had no use
for them. At any rate he was thoroughly discontented, and thought
Jupiter's division of the universe exceedingly unfair.

It so happened that, while he was in this envious state of mind, Juno
was furious against Jupiter for throwing Vulcan out of heaven, and
Apollo was seeking revenge for the death of Æsculapius. So these
three--Neptune, Juno, and Apollo--made a conspiracy against Jupiter.
Their plot was to excite all the gods and goddesses to rebel against
their king, to take him by surprise, to imprison him forever, and to
get--I do not know what they meant to get by it; most likely, like all
rebels, they did not know that themselves. However, in one way and
another, by promises, and by working up all sorts of grievances, they
drew nearly every god and goddess into their treason, of which
Jupiter, in his trust of them all, had not the faintest suspicion. He
went on ruling and feasting, little guessing that his own wife, his
own brother, and the whole of his court, were secret traitors. Even
Minerva, in spite of her wisdom and her old quarrel with Neptune, is
said to have joined in the plot against her own father, though this is
hard to believe.

The plotters made only one mistake--they forgot that traitors must
expect treachery. There was a certain sea-nymph named Thetis, married
to a mortal, and she, having been admitted into the plot, tried to
think of some way of saving the king of gods and men. But what could
one sea-nymph do? If she went and told Jupiter, he would not believe
her; he would most likely only punish her for lying and slander. So,
in her trouble, she went for advice to the giant Briareus, who had
fifty heads to think with instead of only one. Having thought with
them all, one after another, he said at last, "Leave it to me."

At length the time came for carrying out the plot. The conspirators
held a great meeting, and, having talked themselves into a great state
of rage against Jupiter, marched in a body into the council chamber of
Olympus, where they expected to find him at that time of day sleeping
upon his throne, and at their mercy. And so indeed they did find him.
But, to their dismay, there sat beside him a monstrous and terrible
giant, with a hundred huge hands and fifty yawning mouths, and a
hundred eyes wide awake and rolling. And so terrified were they by the
unexpected sight, that they stood rooted to the spot by fear; and when
Jupiter woke up and saw how matters were, they could only confess
their treason and pray for pardon.

Thus Jupiter learned the lesson that a king must not venture to go to
sleep, even on his throne, unless he is guarded by at least a hundred
faithful hands, fifty shrewd brains, and a hundred vigilant eyes,
which cannot happen often, since a Briareus is not to be found every
day. But Jupiter thought that the plotters, or at least their
ringleaders, deserved a lesson also. He thought it better to hush up
the conspiracy, and not to make another scandal by punishing Juno.
But he banished Apollo from Olympus for nine years as a punishment for
having killed the Cyclopes, as you have read in the story of Marsyas;
and he condemned Neptune, by way of hard labor, to build the walls of
the famous city of Troy. And so the great Olympian conspiracy came to
an end, and Jupiter remained more powerful than ever.

       *       *       *       *       *

Neptune is chiefly known by his trident or three-pronged scepter, by
means of which he causes earthquakes, and can bring up islands from
the bottom of the sea. He had a great many sea-gods and sea-goddesses
under him, his queen-consort being Amphitrite. There were Oceanus and
Tethys, the father and mother of all the Rivers; Triton, a strange
god, in shape half man and half fish, who makes storms and calms by
blowing a shell as if it were a horn; Proteus, who foretells the
future to anybody who can find him on the sea-shore, catch him, and
chain him up so that he cannot change his shape and escape into the
sea; Nereus, with his long blue hair and beard. There were also the
Nereids, his fifty daughters, among whom was Thetis; the Oceanides or
sea-nymphs; and the Sirens--mermaids who drew sailors to their island
by their wonderful singing, and then fell upon them and devoured them.
There were the Harpies also: three horrible monsters, each with a
woman's face, a vulture's body, and feet and hands having sharp claws
for toes and fingers--these were the whirlwinds. But it is impossible
to make a list of the wonders of the sea.




HADES.


PART I.--THE KING AND QUEEN OF THE DEAD.

    "Not far from Enna's walls there lies a lake,
    Pergus by name: than which not Cayster's stream
    Is fuller of the songs of gliding swans.
    A woodland girds it with a veil of leaves
    To shelter from the heat; where the fresh soil
    Bears purple flowers, and keeps perpetual spring."

So the poet Ovid describes the pleasant place where the nymph
Proserpine, the beautiful daughter of Ceres, goddess of the fruits of
the earth, was one day with her companions, gathering violets and
lilies. All were trying who should gather the most, and were very
happy and merry. In her search for flowers, Proserpine wandered out of
sight of her companions, who went on gathering and singing and
laughing: till suddenly their merriment was stopped by a piercing
scream for help; and then by another and another; till the cries grew
fainter and fainter, and were at last heard no more.

Where was Proserpine? They were sure it was her cries they had heard:
and, though they searched through the whole wood, they could not find
her anywhere. All they could do was to go to Ceres, and tell her that
her daughter had disappeared, and could not be found for all their
seeking.

Ceres, who is the best and kindest of all the goddesses, loved her
daughter dearly, and was disconsolate at the news. Though always so
busy with seed-time and harvest, fields and orchards, she set out to
seek for her lost Proserpine; or at least to find out what had become
of her. "Mother!" had been Proserpine's last cry. Ceres wandered, in
her search, over the whole world,--nay, she explored the very depths
of the sea,--but all in vain. She questioned gods, goddesses, nymphs,
fauns, and satyrs, men and women; but none could give her any news of
Proserpine. She never slept, but set fire to the pine-trees on the top
of Mount Ætna to serve as torches, so that she might see to search by
night as well as by day. She forgot to eat and drink, and, though the
goddess of Corn and Plenty, she would have perished of hunger and
thirst had not an old woman named Baubo, though ignorant who she was,
taken pity on her, and given her some hot porridge, which Ceres drank
eagerly--so eagerly that a boy who saw her drinking jeered at her for
a glutton. This was too much for the goddess, in her despair, to bear.
She for once lost her temper, and threw the rest of the hot porridge
over the grinning boy, whom it turned into a spotted lizard for
laughing at a stranger's needs and an old woman's charity.

At length, worn out and desperate, the poor mother wandered back to
Sicily, so changed that nobody knew her. Nor could she say who she
was, for grief had made her dumb. In this state she arrived at a place
called Cyane, near to where Proserpine had been lost. And here one
day, while looking at a pool (for she never ceased to look everywhere)
she saw her daughter's girdle lying at the bottom of the water. Then,
giving up her last spark of hope, she found her voice again, and
mourned aloud. Her grief was terrible to hear and see. She cursed the
earth, so that it no longer brought forth corn: she broke the ploughs:
the seeds perished in the fields, and the cattle in their stalls.

But one day Ceres, roaming along the banks of the river Alpheus,
plainly heard its waters say:--

"We have seen Proserpine! She is unhappy; but she is a great queen:
she is the wife of Pluto, the King of the Underworld."

Then Ceres knew that Proserpine had been carried off by the great and
dreadful god Pluto, to whom, when Jupiter divided the world, had been
given Hades--the underground kingdom of ghosts and of the souls of the
dead: the greatest kingdom of all. It was true:--Pluto had seen
Proserpine while she was gathering flowers in the wood, had snatched
her up into his chariot with black horses, and, in spite of her
struggles and cries for help, had driven off with her to his
underground palace through a cavern which he opened with a touch of
his two-pronged scepter: the cavern then filled up with water, and
became the lake of Cyane, at the bottom of which Ceres had found the
girdle. As soon as she could recover her senses, Ceres flew up to
heaven, threw herself before Jupiter, and passionately demanded that
her daughter should be given back to her.

It was a difficult question for Jupiter to settle. He pitied Ceres
with all his heart, and wished to help her. But high reasons of state
made him unwilling to offend Pluto: and then, who had ever heard of
anybody coming back from Hades? That would be against all the laws of
gods and men.

But there were three mysterious beings, of whom I have not yet told
you, called the Fates--three sisters who rule over life and death, and
whose will even the gods of heaven, even Jupiter himself, must obey.
Somewhere or other they sit and spin with their distaffs the histories
of nations and the lives and deaths of men. Nothing can happen without
their leave; and nobody can prevent from coming to pass whatever the
Fates decree. So Jupiter inquired of the Fates if it was their will
that Proserpine should return from the kingdom of the grave.

"She may return," said they. "But not if she has eaten or drunk in the
kingdom of Pluto. If she has tasted the food of death, then she may
not return."

       *       *       *       *       *

When Pluto received this message he was greatly troubled; for, though
he had carried off Proserpine in that cruel way, he very deeply loved
her, and hoped that, if he could keep her with him, he should at last
conquer her sorrow and get her to love him in return. He had made her
his wife and queen, and could not bear the thought of losing her. He
anxiously inquired of every ghost and spirit in Hades if Queen
Proserpine had tasted food, if ever so little; but not one had seen
her touch even bread or water since she had been brought below. It was
Pluto's turn to lose Proserpine. Ceres was already rejoicing in the
thought of seeing her long-lost daughter. Proserpine was just about to
return to earth, when there stepped forth one of Pluto's courtiers,
named Asculaphus, and accused Proserpine of having tasted the juice of
seven pomegranate seeds. And the Fates knew that it was true.

And Proserpine also knew it, and cried aloud for sorrow that she
should never see her mother again; and her cry turned the treacherous,
tale-bearing Asculaphus into a hooting owl. But this did not undo the
work of those seven fatal pomegranate seeds. Even the Fates were
filled with pity; even the heart of Pluto was touched by the mother's
and the daughter's despair. The Fates could not change their decree.
But it was settled that, though Proserpine must continue to be the
wife of Pluto and the Queen of Hades, she should be allowed to spend
six months out of every year on earth with Ceres. And that is the
reason of summer and winter. It is summer when Ceres is happy with her
daughter, and makes the earth rejoice with flowers and fruit and corn.
It is winter when she is left alone, and Proserpine goes back to Pluto
until next spring. Proserpine is the beauty and joy of the earth,
which seems to die in winter, but only to come to life again. And she
is the beauty of death besides. You will remember what you read in the
story of Psyche about the beauty of Proserpine.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was Ceres who taught men to plow, harrow, sow, and reap; and they
were very grateful to her everywhere. The worship of Ceres, under many
names, was the chief part of the religion of ancient times. You will
know her, from pictures and statues, as a noble and stately goddess,
crowned with a garland of corn, holding a lighted torch, sometimes
standing in a chariot drawn by flying dragons. I have said she had
many names, one of the most famous being Demeter, which means "Mother
Earth"; and "Bona Dea," that is to say, "the Good Goddess," was
another.

Proserpine, as Queen of Hades, became a very strange and mysterious
goddess indeed. One of her names is Hecate, and under that name she
rules over magic. She often wears a veil, and a crown of stars; and,
like Pluto, carries the scepter with two prongs, differing from
Neptune's trident, which has three.

Pluto was a dark and gloomy god. No temples were ever built to him,
and only black animals were sacrificed upon his altars. But he was
just, although pitiless and stern. He sits upon a throne of sulphur in
his underground palace, from which flow the four rivers of
Hades--Cocytus, the river of Lamentation; Acheron, the river of
Sorrow; Lethe, the river of Forgetfulness; and Phlegethon, the river
of Fire. On his left hand sits Proserpine, near to whom stand the
Furies, three fiends with snakes instead of hair; on his right stand
the Fates spinning; at his feet lies the three-headed dog, Cerberus;
and the Harpies hover over him, waiting for orders.

On the whole, it is not strange that Proserpine should be glad when
the time for her six months' visit to her mother comes round.


PART II.--THE KINGDOM.

"Hades," the name of the kingdom of Pluto and Proserpine, means
"invisible," because it is unseen by living eyes. It is surrounded by
the river Styx by which the gods swore their sacred oath, and which
flows round and round it in nine circles before springing up into the
living world. Even when the Styx rises out of the ground in the land
of Arcadia, it still remains a cold black river, whose waters are
poisonous to drink; but if anybody was bold enough to bathe in them,
and lucky enough to come out alive, no weapon afterwards would have
power to wound him. Some people say that Thetis (the goddess who saved
Jupiter from the great plot) dipped her child Achilles into the Styx
as soon as he was born, head foremost, holding him by the left heel
between her finger and thumb. But she forgot that her thumb and finger
prevented the water from touching the skin just where she held him.
And so, when he grew up, though no weapon could hurt him anywhere
else, yet, when he was hit by an arrow in the left heel, he died of
the wound.

When anybody died, his body was buried or burned by his friends, and
his soul left him and went down to Hades, till it reached the banks of
the Styx. Here it waited for Charon's ferry-boat, about which you read
in the story of Psyche. If its friends had buried its body properly,
they had given it a small silver coin to pay the ferryman, who took
the money and at once rowed it across the river. But if the soul had
no money to pay for its passage, it had to wait for a hundred years,
shivering and cold. Arrived on the other side, the soul was taken
before the three judges of Hades--Minos, Æacus, and Rhadamanthus. All
three had been kings on earth, so famous for wisdom and justice that,
when they died, Pluto made them the judges of the dead. These decided
what was to be done with the soul. If it had been virtuous during its
life upon earth, it was allowed to enter Elysium, or the region of
happiness; if it had been wicked, it was condemned to the horrible
prison of Tartarus, there to be punished by torture.

Elysium, which is also called "the Elysian fields," or "the Islands of
the Blest," was a very delightful place, like the most beautiful
country in the finest weather, never too hot or too cold, and full of
sweet scents and sounds. There the souls of the happy enjoyed forever,
without ever getting tired, whatever had given them the most pleasure
upon earth--hunting, or war, or learning, or music, or whatever it
might be: only all their pleasures became innocent and noble, and
even if they fought, it was all in friendship and without harm.
Nothing was quite real there: it was more like a beautiful and happy
dream, lasting forever. Some of the very best and greatest human souls
were taken up into Olympus and made "Demi-gods," that is to say
"Half-gods"; but of course this was a very rare honor. The dream of
Elysium was thought to be reward enough for the souls which, in their
lives, had done more good than evil.

Tartarus, the place of torment, was a very different place, as I need
not say. It was farther below the earth than the earth is below the
sky, and was surrounded by three brazen walls, and by Phlegethon, the
river of Fire. The only entrance was through a high tower, with gates
which not even the gods could open, and guarded by the three-headed
dog Cerberus, which never slept; and the air was three times darker
than the darkest midnight, lighted only by the terrible flames of
Phlegethon. The jailers were Nemesis and the Furies. Nemesis is the
great stern power who never allows the guilty to escape from their
just punishment, nor the good to lose their just reward. If people are
happier or more fortunate than they deserve to be, she always, either
in this life or in Hades, gives them enough misery at last, until they
are just as happy or unhappy as they deserve to be, and neither less
nor more; and if they seem less happy or less fortunate than they
deserve, she makes it up to them in the end. She is often so strangely
slow in coming, that she has been called lame. But she always comes at
last: if she is slow, she is sure.

There was once a king of the island of Samos, named Polycrates, who
was famous for his marvelous good fortune. Nothing ever went wrong
with him; he did not seem able to fail in anything, even if he tried;
he knew neither misfortune nor sorrow. Though only the prince of a
little island, he became, by one stroke of good luck after another,
the most powerful monarch of his time, so that the kings of the
greatest nations came to his court to do him homage and admire his
glory. Among these was Amasis, King of Egypt, who was frightened at
the sight of such prosperity, and thought, "This is surely more than
any mortal deserves--Nemesis must surely be near at hand!" So he
advised Polycrates to bring some misfortune upon himself, to keep
Nemesis away. At first Polycrates laughed at such counsel; but, to
remove the friendly fears of Amasis, he threw into the sea a ring with
a magnificent seal, which he prized the most of all his jewels, and
the loss of which made him really unhappy--so you may guess how little
unhappiness he had ever known before. A few days afterwards, however,
while at dinner with Amasis, he happened to cut open a large fish;
and behold, inside the fish he found the ring, which thus came back
to him from the bottom of the sea. Instantly Amasis rose from the
table and hurried back to Egypt, exclaiming, "I dare not have anything
more to do with so fortunate a man--Nemesis must be at the door!" And
he was right; and when she came, she came indeed! From the hour when
the ring was found in the fish, all the prosperity of Polycrates
departed from him; he sank lower and lower; until at last he was
treacherously captured by the governor of one of his own cities, and
put to a shameful death by torture. You will often hear people speak
of "the Ring of Polycrates." When they do, they mean (or ought to
mean) that a life of mixed joy and sorrow, such as most of us have, is
what most of us deserve; and that this is the happiest as well as the
best for us in the long-run. It is not good for us to know nothing of
sorrow or pain. And if we ever feel that we suffer unjustly--well,
Nemesis, the slow but the sure, will make it up to us in the end.

However, I must go back to Tartarus, in spite of its unpleasantness. I
was speaking of the Furies, who served under Nemesis as its jailers.
These were three creatures like women, with hissing and writhing
snakes instead of hair, holding a torch in one hand, and a whip made
of live scorpions in the other. These whips were the whips of
_Conscience_, with which they scourged and stung the souls both of
the dead and the living. They were the chief servants of Nemesis,
because the stings of Conscience are the most terrible of all her
punishments. The Furies were the most dreadful creatures in or out of
Hades. People had such awe and horror of them that they dared not even
name them. The real name of the Furies was the "Erinyes," which means
the desperate madness of those whom the gods or fates have cursed. But
people who wanted to speak of them always called them the
"Eumenides"--that is to say, "the Gracious Ladies"--just as timid
people in England used to say "the Good Folk" instead of "the
Fairies," for fear of making them angry by naming their real name.

The tortures of Tartarus were of all sorts and kinds. Among the evil
souls which suffered there, the most famous were the three wicked
kings, Ixion, Sisyphus, and Tantalus. Ixion was tied by his arms and
legs to the spokes of a wheel, which whirled round and round at full
speed without ever giving him one moment's rest. Sisyphus had to carry
up to the top of a high and steep hill a huge stone, which, as soon as
he got it up, instantly rolled to the bottom again, so that his labor
had no end. The torment of Tantalus was perhaps the worst of all.
Maddened with hunger and thirst, he was chained to a rock in such a
manner that he could not seize one of the delicious fruits that hung
close to his eyes, or one of the cups of cool and fragrant drink which
unseen hands put to his lips, and then, just as he was about to taste,
snatched away again. Being "tantalized" means being treated like
Tantalus. Then there were the Danaides, or the forty-nine daughters of
King Dananus, who had all murdered their husbands, and were condemned
to fill sieves with water, which of course ran out through the holes
as soon as they poured it in. There had been fifty Danaides; but the
fiftieth had taken no part in her sisters' crime. There was also the
wicked giant Tityus, who was so huge that his body covered nine acres
of ground, and whose punishment was, to be perpetually devoured by
vultures.

Souls not good enough for Elysium, but not bad enough for Tartarus,
were treated in another way. Some were sent to wander about the world
as Lemures, or homeless ghosts; others were given to drink of the
waters of the Lethe, the river of Forgetfulness, which threw them into
a dreamless sleep forever.


PART III.--ORPHEUS AND EURYDICE.

Upon the heights of Mount Helicon, by the spring of water called
Hippocrene, and upon the peak of Parnassus, whence flows forth the
fountain of Castalia, dwelt the Muses--the nine gracious goddesses
whose gifts to men are music, poetry, painting, eloquence, and all the
pleasures of the mind. The Muse who had the sweetest voice was named
Calliope; and she had a son named Orpheus, who grew up to be the most
wonderful musician that ever was known. When he sang and played, it
was as if his mother's voice were singing to Apollo's lyre, so that he
charmed gods as well as men.

But though he thus charmed all, he cared for nothing in the whole
world but his art, until he met with a girl named Eurydice, with whom
he fell passionately in love, and who loved him with her whole heart
in return. They married, and for a long time were perfectly happy. But
one unlucky day Eurydice, while running through some long grass, was
stung by a poisonous snake in the foot; and she died.

To Orpheus it was like losing his own soul; and it was indeed
bitterly cruel to have lost Eurydice in the midst of their happiness
together. Nothing could comfort him. He could only wander out among
the hills and streams with his lyre, lamenting Eurydice, and imploring
her to come back to him, in such heartbroken passionate music that the
very rivers and mountains and winds seemed to find a voice, and to
join with him in his ceaseless prayer of "Eurydice! come back to me,
even from the grave." And so for days and nights he wandered, singing
the same song to his lyre, with all his heart and soul, till it seemed
impossible that Death itself should be deaf to such a prayer.

At last a very strange thing befell. So desperately sweet did his
music grow that the earth could bear it no longer, but opened; so that
he saw before him the black waters of the Styx, and Charon's boat
filled with its freight of souls. His wonderful music, made more
wonderful still by love and sorrow, had opened to him the very gate of
Hades, where Eurydice had gone. Hope rose in his heart. Still playing,
he stepped into the boat and crossed the Styx, none hindering him, or
even asking him for his fee. Minos, Æacus, and Rhadamanthus, the three
stern judges of the dead, let him pass unquestioned--even they forgot
their duty in the music of his voice and lyre. As he played and sang
there floated round him, drawn by his music, thousands of souls like
flocks of birds. The sound of his lyre reached into Tartarus itself.
Cerberus crouched harmless; the Furies felt a thrill of pity; for one
whole instant Tantalus forgot his thirst, the wheel of Ixion ceased
whirling, and the stone of Sisyphus stopped rolling down-hill.

Thus Orpheus played his way into the very presence of Pluto and
Proserpine. Pluto pitied him; but it was Proserpine who, no doubt
remembering her own mother's sorrows and wanderings, thought of a way
to help him.

"You may have back your wife," said she; "but on one condition. You
have conquered Death; but that is not enough. You must conquer even
Love, for her sake. Go back to earth, playing and singing as you came,
and Eurydice shall follow behind you. But if, until you pass the gate
of Hades, you turn your head to look at her; if you give even a single
glance behind you to see if she is there, then you shall never see her
again."

You may think that Eurydice might have been given to him back without
any conditions. But Hades was ruled by strict laws, which not even the
king and queen could break; and nobody could be allowed to conquer
death without showing that he could conquer temptation. Orpheus was
overjoyed. Singing a hymn of thanks, he went back the way he came;
and presently he could hear a faint sound behind him, as if the
whisper of a footfall were keeping pace with him. Was it indeed
Eurydice? He longed to look round and see; but he remembered
Proserpine's condition, and he did not let his eyes wander from the
chink of daylight which presently began to gleam before him. As he
came nearer and nearer to the upper world of light, and life, and day,
the footfall behind him grew more and more distinct, until he knew it
to be Eurydice's: it was as if a silent phantom were gradually putting
on its body again as it followed him. If he could but once look
round--not to look was almost more than he could bear. But he might
listen; and now he heard her breathe, deeply and gladly, as the breath
of life came back to her. His music was indeed bringing her back from
the grave!

At last he saw, full in sight, the sunlit hills of the upper world.
Forgetting that the gate of Hades had not yet been passed, he, in his
impatience, turned round to clasp Eurydice to his heart--only to see
her change back again into a pale, cold ghost, which, with a wail of
love and sorrow, faded away forever.

So Orpheus came back again from Hades heartbroken and alone. Once
more, doubly hopeless, and hating himself for his own weakness, he
wandered among the mountains and forests with his lyre. But while he
was broken-hearted, his music became more wonderful than ever; for had
he not seen with his eyes all the marvels of the under-world? Lions
and tigers followed him as he sang, and became as gentle as lambs. The
strongest oaks bent down to listen--nay, even the very mountains bowed
their heads, and the swiftest rivers stood still to hear. He sang of
Love and Death and Sorrow, and of all the mysteries of the world
above, and of the world below, so that men looked upon him as a
prophet, and came to him to learn wisdom.

But his own heart remained broken and dead within him. He had no more
love left to give to any human being. The noblest and fairest women in
the land sought to win his love, but he was deaf and blind to them
all. So their love turned to hate; and at last a number of them,
enraged by his coldness, fell upon him and slew him, and threw his
head into the river Hebrus. And, as his head floated away, the dead
lips were heard to murmur:--

"Eurydice! Eurydice!"


PART IV.--THE MAN WHO NEVER DIED.

There was just one mortal who kept clear of Hades altogether. But
whether he was really lucky in that or not, I must leave you to settle
when you have heard his story.

       *       *       *       *       *

If you have ever seen the sun rise, you have seen the wings of Aurora.
Aurora is the dawn; and as she opens her wings you see all their
colors--first pale-grey; then a delicate amber, which deepens into
saffron; then the tint of a pink-rose, which grows fuller and fuller
till it becomes crimson and purple, which turns to gold when the
chariot of the Sun appears. It is she who throws open the gates of the
sky for Phœbus Apollo to start upon his daily journey, just as it
is Thetis who shuts them, and brings the twilight, when his journey is
done.

Aurora is always glad and beautiful and young; always full of hope,
because she closes her splendid wings and goes to sleep before the
troubles of the day begin; and her only work is to feed the flowers
with dew. But once upon a time she fell in love with a mortal named
Tithonus; and she promised to grant him whatever boon he most desired.

I suppose almost everybody has tried to think of what he would wish
for if a goddess or fairy gave him such a chance. Tithonus thought
hard for a minute, and then said:--

"Great and beautiful goddess, my wish is that I may never die, so that
I may see you every morning forever."

Now of course it was against all the laws of Hades that a mortal
should never die--unless, of course, he was allowed to taste the
Ambrosia, the food of the gods, which was very seldom allowed. How
Aurora managed it, I cannot tell, because I have never been told. But
she kept her word somehow, and Tithonus got leave to live forever.

And so long as he was young and strong, and could get up early in the
morning to look at the color of Aurora's wings, that was all very
well. It did just as well as if he were to die in time, like other
men. But it happened at last that, while Aurora remained as young as
ever, Tithonus began to get old. The promise of endless life did not
prevent him from growing bald, and toothless, and liable to catch cold
if he went out into the keen morning air. By the time that he was a
hundred years old, he became tired of getting up to see the sun rise
day after day. At two hundred he felt like a bundle of aches and
pains, and he liked a doze in the sun better than a thousand Auroras.
At three hundred he became tired of living, and wanted to be able to
creep into some quiet corner of Hades, drink a cup of Lethe, and go to
sleep and think of nothing. But he could not; for though racked with
pain and weary of life, he could not die!

He could only shrink and shrivel till, after many hundreds of years,
he was less than two inches long. His skin turned dry and brown. His
voice became cracked, and thin, and shrill. He lost his senses, and
kept on chirping the same thing over and over again. He never stirred
from the warmth of the chimney-corner, night or day. His legs grew as
thin as threads of cotton. He dwindled into a dry, wooden-like insect.

In short, a _Cricket_.

And such he remains to this day. But Aurora is as young and as
beautiful and as fresh as ever, and has clean forgotten him; while he
spends his life in trying to be merry, and in chirping:--

"Oh, how I want to die!"




THE ADVENTURES OF PERSEUS.


Once upon a time there was a king of Argos named Acrisius, to whom it
had been foretold that he would be slain by his daughter's son.

This troubled him greatly. So he built a high tower of brass, and
imprisoned his daughter Danaë in the very highest room. Having
furnished her with provisions and amusements to last her all her life,
he closed up all the entrances, so that nobody could get into the
tower, and set guards all round it, so that nobody could even come
near it. He did all this so that she should never marry and have a son
who would grow up to kill him.

You may imagine what sort of a life Danae led, shut up in the brazen
tower. She was made comfortable enough, and had plenty to eat and
drink, and musical instruments, and pictures, and jewels, and all such
things; but she never, from year's end to year's end, saw a face,
except when she looked into the looking-glass, nor heard a voice but
when she sang to herself--which she soon got tired of doing. She could
not even look out of the window, because there were no windows to
look from. She lived by lamplight, and she knew that this was to be
her life for all the rest of her days.

So Acrisius felt safe and satisfied, and thought he had baffled Fate
very cleverly indeed. And thus things went on for many years--what
endless years they must have been to the imprisoned princess!--till
one day she heard a little chinking noise, as if a gold coin had
fallen upon the brazen floor of her room. She did not, however, pay
any particular heed; indeed, she must by that time have got used to
all sorts of queer fancies. But presently she heard it again. And,
looking down in an idle way, sure enough she saw a couple of gold
coins lying on the floor.

That seemed rather odd, for whence could they have come? Then a third
coin joined the two others, and, raising her eyes to the ceiling, she
saw coin after coin coming through a crack so small that she had not
known till now that it was there. Faster and faster came the coins,
till they became a shower, and the heap of gold on the floor stood
higher than her head. Then the shower ceased, and the crack was still
so small that she could not see whence the coins had fallen. As she
stood wondering, the heap began to stir itself; the gold pieces melted
into a single mass, which gradually seemed to take life and form. At
last, where the gold had been, she saw the form of a man, but so
stately and royal, and so much grander and nobler than any mere man
could be, that she fell upon her knees before him.

"I am Jupiter," said he, raising her, "and I have chosen you to be my
earthly bride."

So just that little crack in the ceiling, only just big enough for a
thin gold coin to squeeze through, brought about what Acrisius had
been at such trouble to prevent. And in time the news came to the king
that a child had been heard crying in the brazen tower. He broke his
way in, hurried up the staircase to the highest room, and there, to
his rage and terror, he found Danae with a child, a boy, in her arms.

But he was determined not to let fate conquer him. He could not very
well have his daughter and grandson put to death--at least openly. But
he had them carried out to sea and then turned adrift in a small leaky
boat without sail, oars or rudder, so that they were certain to be
drowned. This having been done, Acrisius felt happy and comfortable
again.

Now there lived on the little island of Seriphus, more than two
hundred miles away, an honest fisherman named Dictys. It is often
rough weather about there, and bad for fishing; but he was a brave and
skilful sailor, and the weather, in order to keep him ashore, had to
be very rough indeed. You may think, therefore, how bad the weather
was when, for the first time in his life, he was unable to cast his
nets for many days and nights together,--so many that he began to
wonder what in the world he should do to get food for his wife and
children. He used to lie awake listening to the howling wind and
roaring sea, and then, going down to the beach, sought for food among
the rocks and pools, thinking himself lucky if he could find a damaged
crab or a bunch of eatable sea-weed.

One morning while he was searching about with a heavy heart, he,
passing a jutting rock, came suddenly upon a young and handsome woman,
in clothes all torn and drenched by the waves, sitting with a baby in
her lap, and forlornly rocking herself to and fro. Hard by were the
broken timbers of a boat, which had doubtless been blown ashore by the
wind. Dictys questioned her kindly, but she could not or would not
answer; so, taking her by the hand, he led her to his cottage, where
his wife, who was as good-hearted as he, made a big fire of
wreck-wood, and gave the mother and child a share of what food they
had left, though it could ill be spared. From their famished looks he
judged that they must have been tossing about on the waves for many
days. But though the woman thanked him gratefully, with tears in her
eyes, she did not tell him anything of her story except what he could
see for himself--that she had been lost at sea.

"Perhaps she has lost her memory," he said to his wife, when their
guests were sleeping, worn out with all they had gone through. "What
is to be done? We do not even know who they are."

"And look at their clothes!" said his wife. "For all their being in
rags, they might have been made for a queen and a queen's son. But
whoever they are," she said with a sigh, "we can't let them perish of
hunger and cold. I never saw such a beautiful child--not even among
our own."

Dictys sighed still more deeply, for to be burdened with two more
mouths to feed in those bad times was a serious thing, even though his
heart also bled for the misery of the mother and the beauty of the
boy.... "I have it, wife!" he exclaimed at last. "As soon as they are
rested, and as I've nothing else to do, worse luck, I'll take them to
the king. He'll do something for them, I'm sure. And if he doesn't,
why, we must do what we can, that's all, and hope for better times."

So when the mother and child were quite rested and refreshed, Dictys
set off with them for the king's palace, doing his best to cheer them
by the way. Seriphus is a very little island, not more than a dozen
miles round, so they had not to go far, and fortunately they found the
king at home. The King of Seriphus at that time was Polydectes, who,
having heard the fisherman's story, and being struck with the beauty
and high-born air both of the woman and of the child, kept them in
his own palace, treated them as guests whom he delighted to honor, and
was much too polite to ask questions. The mother told nobody anything
except that her child's name was Perseus, and that hers was Danae.

       *       *       *       *       *

Perseus grew up into such splendid manhood that for a long time
Polydectes was fond and proud of him, and treated him as if he were
his own son. He was strong and handsome, brave, noble-minded, and
marvelously accomplished both in mind and body. He was devoted to his
mother; and he could never do enough to show his gratitude to Dictys
the fisherman, who had been kind to her in her need. But his very
virtues became his misfortune. Polydectes gradually became jealous of
him, for he could not help seeing that the people of Seriphus loved
and honored Perseus more than the king himself, and he was afraid that
they might rebel and make Perseus their king. Besides that, he wanted
to have Danae in his power, and without a protector, so that he might
marry her against her will. Therefore he bethought him of a plot by
which he could get rid of Perseus forever in a seemingly honorable
way.

So one day he called the young man to him, and said:--

"Perseus, I know how brave you are, and how fond of all sorts of
difficult adventures. Did you ever hear of the Gorgons? Well, the
Gorgons are three terrible demon sisters who live in the middle of
Africa. Their bodies are covered with scales like dragons, which no
spear can pierce; their hands are brazen claws; they have snakes
instead of hair, just like the Furies--I mean the Eumenides; and they
have teeth as long as the tusks of a wild boar; and whoever looks upon
them is turned to stone. All three are dreadful; but the one who is
named Medusa is the most dreadful of all. Now I have been thinking, as
you are so fond of adventures, you might go and cut off Medusa's head.
It would be something to be proud of for the rest of your days."

Perseus was rather taken aback by such an errand. In the first place,
he did not know where to find the Gorgons; in the second place, how
was he to kill a creature who would turn him into stone by one glance
of her eyes? But he was much too brave to refuse, or even to think of
refusing. "I will just bid my mother good-bye, and then I will start
at once," said he. He did not tell his mother what he had undertaken
to do for fear of alarming her; but he said good-bye to her as
cheerfully as if he were only going for a night's fishing with their
friend the fisherman. Then, having asked Dictys to take care of his
mother till he came back again, he lay down to get a little sleep
before starting.

He had a curious dream. He thought that Pluto, Minerva, and Mercury
came to his bedside, and that each made him a parting present. Pluto
gave him a helmet, Minerva a shield, and Mercury a pair of sandals,
with little wings fastened to them, and a curious weapon, of which the
blade was shaped like a scythe, and made of a single diamond. But the
dream was not so strange as what he found when he woke. There, on his
bed, actually lay the helmet, the shield of polished steel, the winged
sandals, and the scythe-shaped dagger.

Well, somebody must have put them there. Perhaps they were parting
gifts from King Polydectes. So first he put on the helmet; then he
placed the weapon in his belt; then he slung the shield over his
shoulders; last of all, he bound the winged sandals on his feet, and
when the wings spread themselves at his heels, and carried him high up
into the air, he began to think that the visit of the gods must have
been something more than a dream.

He went up so high that the earth looked like a large map spread out
below him, on which the island of Seriphus seemed but a mere speck in
the sea over which he was drifting southward. After many hours of this
strange sort of travel, he began to descend, and came down upon his
feet in the middle of a hot sandy plain, where neither hill nor tree
nor water was to be seen. He could not tell where he was. But he did
not lose courage; and he set out across the desert, knowing that if
he kept straight on in one direction, he must reach somewhere or other
in time.

But not till nearly nightfall did he see, in the far distance, a
cluster of palm-trees--the sure sign of water, which his long journey
over the hot and glaring sand, under the blazing sun, had made him
need sorely. Reaching the palm-trees at last, he found, in the midst
of the cluster, a wooden hut. Wondering that anybody should live in
such a place, but hoping to find food and guidance, he knocked boldly
on the door with the hilt of his sword, and was bidden, by a hoarse,
cracked voice, to come in.

He entered, and found three very old women warming their hands at a
few burning sticks, although it was so hot in the desert that Perseus
could hardly bear the weight of his shield. As he came in, the three
crones turned their faces towards him; and he saw that one of them had
only one eye and no teeth, that another had only one tooth and no eye,
and that the third had neither teeth nor eyes.

"I am a traveler," said Perseus, "and have lost my way. Will you
kindly tell me where I am?"

"Come in and show yourself," said the crone who had the eye, sharply.
"I must see who you are before I answer," she added, though her one
eye was looking straight at him all the while.

"Here I am," said Perseus, stepping into the middle of the room. "I
suppose you can see me now."

"It's very strange--very strange!" said the old woman. "Sisters, I
hear a man's voice, but I see no man!"

"Nonsense, sister!" said the one who had the tooth. "You can't have
put the eye in right. Let me try."

To the amazement of Perseus, the first old woman took out her eye and
passed it to the second, who, after giving it a polish, put it into
her own face and looked round; but she also saw nothing.

The two wrangled for a while as to whether there was anything to be
seen; and then the eye was passed round to the third sister. But she
also failed to see Perseus, though the eye rolled in her head, and
glowed like a live coal.

And so they kept passing the eye round from one to another, and yet
nothing could they see. At last Perseus, feeling terribly hot and
tired, took off Pluto's helmet to cool himself, when suddenly--

"There he is! I see him now!" exclaimed the old woman who, at the
moment, happened to be using the eye.

Then Perseus found out that his helmet made him invisible when he put
it on; and he had already found out the use of his sandals. Perhaps
the other gifts would have their uses too.

He let the old women have a good look at him each in turn, and then
said--

"I am very hungry and thirsty and tired, and don't know where I am.
Will you give me a little food, and tell me who such kind ladies are,
and what this place is, and put me on the right road to where I want
to go?"

It was the one who happened to have the eye in her head that always
spoke.

"We will give you some food," said she, "for you seem a very
well-behaved young man. This place is the great desert of Libya"
(which is what we now call the desert of Sahara, in Africa) "and we
are three sisters, called the Graiæ. And where do you want to go?"

"I want to visit the Gorgons, and particularly Medusa," said he. "Do
you happen to know where they are?"

"Of course we know, for they are our own kinswomen! But never, no,
never, will we tell you where they live, or the way to get there.
Never will we let so handsome a youth be turned into stone!"

"Never!" croaked the old woman with the tooth.

"Never!" mumbled the third.

Perseus did all he could to persuade them, but they were so stubborn
that he was only wasting words. Meanwhile they laid out supper, which
they ate in a very strange way, each taking her turn with the one
tooth which they had among them, and passing it round from one to the
other, just as they did with their only eye. This made the meal rather
long and slow, for they ate enormously. After supper they put the eye
and the tooth into a little box while they took a nap, when Perseus,
watching his opportunity, snatched up the box, put on his helmet, and
cried out--

"Now tell me the way to Medusa, or else you shall never see or eat
again!"

The poor old Graiæ went down on their knees, and implored him to give
them back their only tooth and their only eye. But he said--

"It is my turn to be stubborn. Tell me where to find Medusa, and you
shall have them back; but not a minute before."

"I suppose we must, then," said the eldest, with a sigh. "Well, it
won't be our fault now, whatever happens. And after all, it's better
that you should be turned into stone than that we should be blind and
starved."

"Much better," her sisters groaned.

"Very well, then," said the eldest Graia, "you must go straight on,
night and day, until you come into the country of King Atlas, which is
called Mauritania. Near the king's palace is a garden where the trees
bear golden apples, guarded by a dragon. If the dragon does not devour
you, you must pass the garden gate, and go on, a long, long way, till
you come to a great lake where, if you do not find the Gorgons, you
will be a lucky man."

Perseus gave the old women back their tooth and eye, which they
received with joy, and thanking them for their information, left the
hut and traveled on. After many days and nights, during which he found
it hard to find food, he came into a fertile country wherein stood a
stately palace, so high that it seemed to touch the clouds. Hard by
was a vast garden enclosed by a high wall, and at the gate, sure
enough, sat a monstrous dragon with glaring eyes. But Perseus, wearing
his invisible helmet, passed by safely, because unseen.

In time he came to the lake, where he took off his helmet to quench
his thirst. While he was drinking, he was startled by the approach of
what sounded like a mighty rush of wind, and he had but just time to
put on his helmet again before he saw, reflected in the lake, the
flying form of the terrible Medusa--the Gorgon whom he had vowed to
slay, and who, not seeing him, sat down beside him with folded wings.

Well was it for Perseus that he remembered what would happen to him if
he looked at Medusa. And yet how in the world was he to fight her
without looking at her? That was a puzzle indeed. Suddenly he
bethought himself of Minerva's shield, which was polished like a
mirror. He turned it towards Medusa, and saw, not herself indeed, but
her reflection in the polished shield, which did just as well.

She was indeed a monster--more terrible even than he had expected. She
was of gigantic size, hideous and cruel in face, with the scales and
wings of a dragon, horrible claws, and hundreds of writhing and
hissing snakes on her head instead of hair. No wonder that anybody who
looked on her was turned at once into stone. Perseus, wearing his
helmet, and guiding himself by his mirror, from which he never moved
his eyes, drew his diamond blade, sprang upon the monster, gave one
stroke just between her chin and where her scales began, and, in a
single moment, her hideous head was rolling on the sand. The snakes
gave one last hiss, and the deed was done.

Still keeping his eyes turned away, Perseus, by using his mirror,
found the head, which he slung out of his sight behind him. Scarcely
had he done this when he heard again the sound of wings, like a great
wind--the sisters of Medusa, the other two Gorgons, were flying over
the lake like hurricanes to take vengeance upon her slayer. They could
not see Perseus himself, because of his helmet; but they saw their
sister's head at his back, and could thus swoop down upon him. But
Perseus, remembering his winged sandals, sprang up into the air, and
off he flew, with the raging Gorgons after him.

It was a terrible race! Perseus would not throw away the head, though
it left such a track behind him. For from one of the splashes of blood
which fell upon the earth sprang the giant Chrysaor, armed with a
golden sword; from another leaped into life the winged horse Pegasus,
who immediately darted off through the air and never stopped until he
alighted among the Muses upon Mount Helicon; the smaller drops of
blood as they fell became countless serpents, and all manner of
loathsome crawling things. On and on Perseus flew, not knowing
whither, like one hunted in some horrible dream, till his strength
failed him, and he came down to earth, swiftly and half fainting.

When he opened his eyes and raised himself from the ground, he found
himself in the most beautiful garden he had ever seen, full of trees
laden with fruits of gold. But before him stood a huge giant, so tall
that his head was above the clouds. The giant stooped till Perseus
could see his face, and said in a voice of thunder:--

"I am Atlas, King of Mauritania! How has a miserable pigmy like you
passed the dragon who guards the gate of the garden of golden apples,
and entered in?"

"Then from you, as king of this land," said Perseus, "I claim shelter
and protection in my father's name! For the avengers of blood are
following after me to kill me."

"You are safe with me," said Atlas. "But who is your father, that you
claim shelter and protection in his name?"

"My name is Perseus," said Perseus, proudly, "and I am the son of
Jupiter, the king of gods and men!"

"Of Jupiter?" thundered Atlas. "Then--prepare to die!"

"You would kill a son of Jupiter?" asked Perseus, amazed.

"Ay, and any son of Jupiter who comes in my way! For hath it not been
foretold that by a son of Jupiter shall I be robbed of my golden
apples? For what else are you here? Son of Jupiter, once more, prepare
to die!" And so saying, he lifted his enormous arm, one blow of which
would have swept away ten thousand men as if they were a swarm of
flies.

Perseus gave himself up for lost, for he had no more chance against
Atlas than a beetle would have against an elephant. However, like a
brave knight, he resolved to die fighting: he drew his sword and
grasped his shield--at least what he meant to be his shield; for it
chanced to be Medusa's head which he brought from behind his shoulder
and held up before the giant. Down came the huge right arm of Atlas to
crush him. But even in death the head did its work. No sooner were
Medusa's staring eyes turned upon the giant than all in a moment his
limbs stiffened, and he became a vast mountain of stone, with its
head above the clouds. And there stands Mount Atlas to this day.

       *       *       *       *       *

Thankful for his wonderful escape, Perseus, without taking a single
golden apple, continued his journey, no longer pursued by the Gorgons,
who had doubtless lost trace of him. Leaving Mauritania, he recrossed
the great Libyan desert, and traveled on and on until he reached the
coast of Ethiopia, and entered a great city on the sea-shore.

But though the place was evidently great and rich, the whole air
seemed full of sadness and gloom. The people went about silent and
sighing, and altogether so woe-begone that they had no attention to
spare for a stranger. When he reached the king's palace the signs of
mourning were deeper still: it was like entering a tomb, all was so
plunged in speechless sorrow.

"What is the matter?" asked Perseus at last, seizing a passing servant
by the arm, and compelling him to listen. "Is it the death of the
king?"

"Ah, if it were only that!" said the man. "But no; King Cepheus is
alive and well. Alas, and woe is me!" And so once more he fell to
wailing, and passed on.

Thus over and over again Perseus vainly sought an answer, getting
nothing but tears and groans. And so, none heeding him, he went on
till he reached a chamber where sat the king himself in the midst of
his court; and here was the deepest mourning of all.

"I perceive you are a stranger," said King Cepheus. "Pardon us if we
have seemed inhospitable and unlike the Æthiopians, the friends of the
gods; it is not our way. But," he continued, the tears flowing as he
spoke, "if you knew, you would understand."

"Let me know," said Perseus gently, for he was filled with pity for
the king's tears.

"My daughter, the Princess Andromeda," answered the king, "is
condemned to a horrible death; I know not whether she is yet alive."

"How," asked Perseus, "can a king's daughter be condemned to death
against her father's will?"

"No wonder it sounds strange," answered Cepheus; "but listen:
Andromeda is my only child. For some reason--I know not what--the gods
have permitted the land to be ravaged by a monster which came out of
the sea, whose very breath is a blight and a pestilence, and which
spares neither man, woman, nor child. Not one of us is left without
cause to mourn. Fearing the destruction of all my people, I asked of
the great oracle of Ammon in what way the work of the monster could be
stayed. Alas! the oracle declared that nothing would avail but
delivering up Andromeda herself to its fury to be devoured. What could
I do? Could I doom all my people to lose all their children for the
sake of my own? There was but one thing for a king, who is the father
of all his people, to do: and even now--" But he could say no more.

"Oracle or no oracle," cried Perseus, "it shall not be while I am
alive! Where is the princess?"

"She was chained at sunrise to a rock on the sea-shore, there to wait
for the monster. But where she is now--"

Perseus did not wait for another word, but, leaving the palace,
hurried along the shore, already half covered by the rising tide,
helping himself over the difficult places by the wings at his heels.
At last he came to what made his heart beat and burn with pity and
rage. Chained by her wrists to a pillar of rock was the most beautiful
of all princesses, stripped naked, but for the long hair that fell
over her shoulders, and for the rising waves, which were already
nearly waist-high. But what struck Perseus most was her look of quiet
courage and noble pride--the look of one who was devoting herself to a
cruel death for her country's sake, and in order that others might be
saved.

The whole heart of Perseus went out to her: he vowed, if he could not
save her, to share her doom. But before he could reach her side, a
huge black wave parted, and forth came the monster--a creature like
nothing else of land or sea, with a bloated, shapeless body, studded
with hungry, cruel eyes, and hundreds of long, slimy limbs, twisting
and crawling, each with a yawning mouth, from which streamed livid
fire and horrible fumes. Andromeda turned pale as the loathsome
creature came on with a slowness more dreadful than speed. Perseus
could not wait. Springing from the rock with his wings, he threw
himself, like lightning, full upon the monster, and then began such a
struggle as had never been seen before. The creature twined its limbs
round Perseus, and tried to crush him. As soon as Perseus tore himself
from one, he was clutched by another, while the pulpy mass seemed
proof against thrusts or blows.

Perseus felt his life passing from him; he put all the strength left
him into one last blow. It fell only on the monster's right shoulder.
But that was the one place where it could be pierced. The coils
relaxed, and Perseus, to his own amaze, saw the monster floating, a
shapeless corpse, upon the waves.

Having released Andromeda, who had watched the struggle in an agony of
dread for what had seemed the certain fate of her champion, he carried
her back through the air to her father's palace; and I need not tell
how the mourning turned into wonder and joy!

"What can I do to show my gratitude?" asked Cepheus of Perseus. "Ask
of me whatever you will, and it shall be yours, on the word of a
king!"

"Give me Andromeda to be my wife," said Perseus. "That is all I want
in the world."

"Gladly," said Cepheus; but suddenly he became grave. "I have
promised on the word of a king, which cannot be broken. But I must
warn you that you are not the first in the field. Andromeda has long
been claimed in marriage by the powerful Prince Phineus: and he is not
the man to lose what he wants without giving trouble."

"He never gave any trouble to the monster," said Perseus, thinking
that Cepheus, though kind and honorable, was rather a weak and timid
sort of king. So the marriage of Perseus and Andromeda was settled, to
the great joy of both; and all the nobles were invited to a great
festival in honor of the wedding, and of the delivery of the land. The
Æthiopians were famous for their feasts,--so much so that the gods
themselves would often leave the nectar and ambrosia of Olympus to be
guests at their tables.

Everything went on very happily, when in the very midst of the banquet
was heard the clash of arms; and those who were nearest the door cried
out that Prince Phineus had come with an army to carry off the bride.

"Do not be alarmed," said Perseus. "Only let everybody shut his eyes
until I bid him open them again."

It seemed an odd order; but Cepheus and all his Court had such faith
in Perseus that they instantly obeyed him, and all shut their eyes.
Perseus, especially bidding Andromeda close hers, drew forth Medusa's
head, turning the face towards the door. And when, at his bidding,
Cepheus and the rest opened their eyes and looked, they saw Phineus
and his army all turned into statues of stone.

       *       *       *       *       *

After resting from his adventures at the Court of King Cepheus,
Perseus set sail with Andromeda, in one of the king's ships, for
Seriphus, where they arrived after a safe and pleasant voyage. He was
impatient to see his mother again, and to show King Polydectes how
well he had done his errand. On reaching Seriphus, he left Andromeda
in the ship, while he went alone on shore to see how things had gone
while he had been away.

His way to the palace led him past the temple of Minerva, at the gate
of which he found great confusion. Forcing his way through the crowd,
he entered, and was astonished to see his mother, Danae, crouching in
terror by the altar, with Dictys the fisherman standing before her,
and defending her from King Polydectes and his guards, who were
crowding the temple. Clearing his way to the altar-steps, Perseus
heard hurriedly from Dictys what was happening: how the king, taking
advantage of his absence, had been persecuting Danae to marry him
against her will, and had at last driven her into the temple to make
her his wife by force. Dictys alone had come to her rescue; but what
could one man do against the king and all his guards?

"And now you have come," sighed Dictys, "you will be slain too. See,
they are coming on!"

"You sent me to slay Medusa, King Polydectes," cried Perseus. "See how
well I have obeyed you!"

So saying, he held up the fatal head; and the king and his guards
forthwith became stone. Thus was Polydectes destroyed by his own
treachery.

       *       *       *       *       *

The people desired to make Perseus king; but he had a longing to pay a
visit to the land of Argos, where he had been born, but which he had
never seen. So he made Dictys the fisherman King of Seriphus, thinking
that kindness, courage, and faithfulness were the chief things to be
looked for in the choice of a ruler, and set sail for Argos with his
wife and mother.

Of course nobody there knew any of them; for Perseus had left the
country when a child in arms, and Danae had spent her girlhood shut up
in a brazen tower. It so happened that, when they reached land, the
people of Larissa were celebrating some solemn games in honor of their
king, who had just died--wrestling, racing, and so forth; and Perseus,
hearing the news, went round by way of Larissa to take part in them.

Having shown himself best in every sport, he joined in a game of
quoits, in which, as always, he found himself without a rival. Having
outdone all others, he thought he would outdo even himself; and,
taking up the heaviest quoit, he cast it so far that it passed over
the heads of the circle of spectators, so that none could see where it
fell--

Until they were startled by a cry which made the people crowd to where
an old man had fallen from his seat, and now lay dead upon the ground.
The quoit had struck him on the head, and--

"Fly!" cried those who stood about Perseus. "It is Acrisius, King of
Argos, whom your unlucky quoit has killed!"

And thus came to pass what had been foretold at the beginning--King
Acrisius had been slain by his daughter's son.

       *       *       *       *       *

As for Perseus, whose adventures were now at an end, he refused the
kingdom of Argos, which had come to him in such an unfortunate manner,
and, traveling further into Greece, built a city and made a kingdom
for himself, which he called Mycenæ. Here, with Andromeda and Danae,
he lived in peace and happiness, ruling so well and wisely that when
he died he was made a demi-god, and admitted into Olympus. There are
two constellations which are still called Perseus and Andromeda. The
Gorgon's head he consecrated to Minerva, who fixed it in the middle of
her shield, where it still retained its power of turning the enemies
of the goddess of Wisdom into blocks of stone.

       *       *       *       *       *

I suspect that one part of this story has reminded you of how St.
George of England rescued the Princess Sabra from the dragon. Well,
there is this great likeness among all good knights, that they have
the help of heaven, because they would be equally good and brave
whether they had such help or no.




THE GOLDEN FLEECE.


When Æson, who was King of Iolcos, began to grow old, he left his
kingdom to his infant son, Jason. But the throne was usurped by his
uncle Pēlĭas, who forthwith consulted an oracle as to what he
should do to make himself secure. The answer of the oracle was
strange. It was--"Fear nobody who cometh not with and without a shoe."

"There is nothing very alarming about that," thought Pelias; so,
instead of having Jason killed, as he had first thought of doing, he
sent away the child into Thessaly, a long way off, among the people
called Centaurs, hoping that he would never hear of him again.

The Centaurs were a very singular race. They were half man and half
horse, as if a man's body down to the waist were set upon a horse's
shoulders. Thus they had a horse's four legs for running, and a man's
head and arms for thinking and fighting: they were famous archers,
very learned, and very brave. Their most famous chief was Chiron, who,
besides being their best archer, was also a great philosopher and
physician. Chiron, struck by Jason's quickness, became his teacher,
so that the young prince grew up skilled both in all manly exercises
and in every branch of human knowledge.

When he had become a man, the Centaur thought it only right that he
should know his birth and parentage, and should have a chance of
regaining his father's throne, since he was so fit to be a king. But
first he consulted the oracle, which gave to Chiron as strange an
answer as it had given to Pelias--"Who seeks a crown shall wear the
leopard's hide."

So Jason, by Chiron's counsel, went out hunting, and, having killed a
leopard, dressed himself in its skin. Then he set out, on foot and
alone, for Iolcos; and proceeded without anything happening to him,
until he reached a mountain-torrent, so deep, so broad, and so strong,
that the best of swimmers could not hope to reach the other side.

He was gazing at the torrent, wondering what he should do, when a very
old woman, bent and lame, came hobbling by, and asked him why he
stared so sadly at the stream.

"Reason enough," said he, "when that water is keeping me from a
kingdom."

"Is that all?" asked the old woman; "I can soon put that right for
you. I am going across myself; and I'll take you on my back with the
greatest pleasure in the world."

Jason thought she was laughing at him. But something about her--he
could not tell what--made him feel that she was no common old woman;
and even as he looked her back seemed to straighten itself and her
figure to enlarge. No; she was certainly not joking: her smile was
only friendly and kind. It might not be very dignified for a rightful
king to enter his kingdom dressed up in a leopard's skin and riding on
the back of an old woman, and it did not seem very safe, either.
However, as there was certainly nothing else to be done, he got upon
the back of the old woman, who at once stepped out into the raging
stream.

How strong the flood was he could tell from the forest-trees which it
had torn up by the roots and was carrying away headlong. But while
Jason's brain reeled with the whirl, the old woman remained as steady
as a rock, and strode through the deepest and roughest places with
ease. In a wonderfully short time Jason reached the other side, with
no worse mishap than the loss of his left shoe.

"Never mind that," said the old woman. "The river is bound to have
something. You have only given it a shoe; most people have to give it
their lives."

"But what do you give it then?" asked Jason.

"Oh, the gods go toll-free," said the old woman. "I am Juno." And
before Jason had recovered from his surprise, she was gone.

Jason continued his journey till he reached Iolcos, where the oddity
of a man dressed in nothing but a leopard's skin soon gathered a crowd
around him. The news of the sight spread about till it reached the
ears of King Pelias himself, who came out of his palace to discover
what was going on. But as soon as he caught sight of the stranger in
the leopard-skin he started with dismay. There stood a man with a shoe
and without a shoe--just what the oracle had warned him to fear!

Seeing that it was the king, Jason at once went up to him, and said--

"I am Jason, the son of Æson. Give up to me this kingdom, which is
rightfully mine!"

His boldness and his royal bearing had a great effect upon the people,
who hated Pelias, and were glad to welcome back the rightful heir.
They set up a great shout for Jason, which alarmed Pelias still more;
and many of them pressed forward with drawn swords.

But Pelias, if he had not much courage, had plenty of craft. And so he
answered, after a moment's thought:--

"Why, of course you shall have what is your own. Do you think I want
to rob you--to keep what is not mine for a single day! I am only too
glad to welcome you, my dear nephew, home again. I have been wondering
what had become of you, and not till after long searching did I give
you up for lost. I think you will find that I have taken good care of
your kingdom while you have been away. I deserve some credit for
having had all the hard work, while you, no doubt, have been going
about and amusing yourself. I am very glad to see you--indeed I am."

Jason was rather surprised to find everything so easy, and his uncle
so friendly. Indeed he hardly knew what to say.

"I am only eager to enter upon my duties," said he at last; "and I
shall look to you to help me to govern well."

"That is the right spirit," said Pelias. "So I will tell you the first
of your duties; one that I rejoice to give over to better and younger
hands than mine. It is difficult and even dangerous--"

"All the better," said Jason. "It will bring all the more glory."

"You are an admirable young man! Well, you must know that many
generations ago King Athamas of Thebes married a princess of
Cloudland, named Nephele, and had two children, Phryxus and Helle.
Nephele going mad, he divorced her, and married the princess Ino, and
had two children more. Ino hated Nephele's children, because they
stood in the way of her own. So, being a witch, she desolated Thebes
by a plague, and got a false oracle to declare that the plague should
never cease so long as Phryxus and Helle were alive. Do you
understand?"

"Perfectly," said Jason. "Except that I don't see what all this old
family history has to do with me."

"Patience, and you will see," said Pelias. "Just as Phryxus and his
sister Helle were about to be sacrificed, a winged ram, with a fleece
of pure gold, came out of the sea, took the brother and sister on his
back, and flew away with them through the air. Unluckily, while they
were flying, Helle turned giddy, tumbled off the ram's back, and was
drowned. You have heard of the Hellespont, I suppose? Well, that is
the part of the sea where Helle fell. Phryxus, however, arrived safely
at the Court of Æetes, King of Colchis, beyond the great Black Sea,
where he sacrificed the ram to Jupiter, out of gratitude for his
escape; but kept the golden fleece and married the king's daughter. At
last Æetes, wanting the fleece for himself, murdered Phryxus.
There--do you see your royal duty now?"

"I cannot," said Jason, "honestly say that I do."

"What? Why, Phryxus was the son of Athamas, who was the son of Æolus,
who was the father of Cretheus, who was the father of Æson, who is the
father of _you_. It is as clear as day that Phryxus was your own first
cousin once removed. And what duty can be clearer than avenging the
murder of a first cousin once removed? Especially when the murderer
has a fleece of pure gold waiting for some brave man to bring away. It
is so clear a duty that, if you decline it, I will undertake the
adventure myself, old as I am, rather than let the wrongs of our royal
house go unavenged."

Now glory was Jason's ruling passion. He would have felt disgraced if
he had declined any adventure, however difficult it might be: and the
greater the danger, the greater the glory.

So he had it announced through Iolcos and all the neighboring
countries that he had undertaken the Adventure of the Golden Fleece,
and that all brave knights who desired to share in its perils and
glories would be welcome. The effect of the proclamation was something
wonderful. Iolcos was speedily thronged with princes and knights, the
best and noblest of all Greece, eager to take part in the expedition;
so that Jason found himself captain of a host the like of which for
birth and valor had never been seen--fifty chiefs, and every one of
them known to fame. It would be too long to name them all. But I must
mention "the great twin brethren," Castor and Pollux, whom you know by
more than name: and Orpheus the minstrel, and that other great
minstrel, Amphion, whose music had built the walls of Thebes: and
Autolycus, the craftiest, and Nestor, the wisest, of all mankind: and
Hercŭles, the son of Jupiter, of whose deeds you will read
hereafter: and Meleager, who has also a famous story of his own: and
Theseus of Athens, with whom you will also meet again,--all these and
all their comrades were, like their captain, in the very flower of
their youth, strength, and valor. Atalanta, a princess of Scyros, a
great huntress, joined the expedition disguised as a man: and
Æsculapius was its surgeon and physician.

The next thing was to build a ship to carry so large a company across
the great and terrible Black Sea, which the Greeks called the
"Euxine," or "Friendly"--giving it a good name just because they were
afraid to give it a bad one, lest it should be angry. The ship was at
last built, and called the _Argo_.

The "Argonauts," as Jason and his company are called--that is to say,
the crew of the _Argo_--set sail in great state and honor from a port
of Thessaly, crossed the Ægean Sea, passed through the Dardanelles
into the Sea of Marmora (as those parts are now called), and then
through the Hellespont, the strait where Helle had been drowned, into
the Black Sea.

From end to end of these dark and dangerous waters the good ship
_Argo_ sailed without mishap, save the death of its pilot, Tiphys,
soon after starting. Erginus took his place at the helm. But I cannot
help thinking that there was another reason for the good luck of the
_Argo_. For once, when a great storm arose and threatened shipwreck,
suddenly two flames of light were seen to play round the heads of
Castor and Pollux, and forthwith the wind fell and the waves became
calm. You know that--

    "Safe comes the ship to haven,
      Through tempests and through gales,
    If once the great Twin Brethren
      Sit shining on the sails";

and if this was the virtue of their spirits after death, one may be
certain that it was a good thing to have Castor and Pollux on board
during their brave and blameless lives. Those two flames of light are
still often seen hovering about a ship in stormy weather, and sailors
still believe them to be of good omen.

After a long voyage, the _Argo_ arrived safely at Æa, the capital of
Colchis, where dwelt King Æetes, the same who had murdered Phryxus.
Colchis proved to be a rich and fertile country, inhabited by a people
curiously like the Gypsies, with very dark complexions and black hair,
dressed in brightly colored linen which they alone knew how to weave
and dye. They claimed to be descended from a tribe of Egyptians who
had wandered thither ages ago; and they had many other secrets which
none but they and the Egyptians knew.

Jason, at the head of his company, went before King Æetes, and
demanded from him the Golden Fleece. Æetes received him in state,
sitting upon his throne; and, after hearing Jason's demand,
answered:--

"Far be it from me, a mere barbarian chieftain, to refuse what is
asked of me by so noble an embassy of princes and heroes. I would even
now deliver up to you the Golden Fleece, were it in my power. But how
can I give it to you when it is guarded, even from myself, by two
fierce bulls with brazen horns, which breathe forth flame, and are a
match for armies? Before you can obtain the fleece, you must first
tame these bulls."

Jason desired nothing better. So he and all his comrades went into the
field where the bulls were, and endeavored to bind them. But neither
he, with all his courage, nor the craft of Autolycus, nor the might of
Hercules, nor the courage, skill, and strength of the whole company
together, could prevail against the bulls, who breathed fire, and
gored right and left with their brazen horns. There was work for
Æsculapius that day.

King Æetes had known very well how it would be; but Jason, when night,
came, retired to the chamber which had been assigned to him in
despair. Midnight found him still waking, when the door opened, and
there stood before him, holding a lamp, a tall and beautiful woman,
dark-skinned, black-eyed, and with long black hair--beautiful, as I
have said, but terrible in her beauty.

"You have no cause for shame," said she, in a softer voice than he
would have expected. "They were enchanted bulls: and not ten times
your number would have fared better. This is a nation of enchanters,
whose king knows how to laugh you Greeks and your boasted bravery to
scorn. But I am the greatest of all enchanters; and I will teach you
how to tame the bulls--if you will promise me one thing."

"Anything!" said Jason. "Only tell me who you are, and what you
require of me."

"I am Medea, the king's daughter," said she. "And what I require is
that you shall marry me this night in the Temple of Hecate, the Queen
of Witches, and that you will swear before her altar to be true and
faithful to me forever."

"Gladly," exclaimed Jason, who, to succeed in his adventure, would
have gladly sworn anything to any one.

So he followed her to the Temple of Hecate, the Witch-Queen, and
there, with many strange and dreadful rites, he married her, and swore
to be true and faithful to Medea forever. Then she gave him a magic
herb, and said:--

"This will tame the bulls." And she also gave him a sling and a stone,
adding, "Use this when there is need."

The next morning Jason went into the field alone. As soon as the scent
of the herb reached the bulls' nostrils they crouched at his feet;
and when Æetes and his Court, and the Greek princes with them, came
forth, lo! there was Jason quietly driving a plough drawn by the
bulls, who were now as tame as common oxen.

"Some one has been betraying me," thought the king angrily. But he hid
his anger, and said: "You have done very well so far. I am sorry to
say, however, that the Golden Fleece has other guards. Do you see
these serpents' teeth? You must sow these in the furrow you have made
with your plough--and then the gods help you if they can."

So Jason, having finished his ploughing, sowed the serpents' teeth as
if they were seeds of corn. And then from that seed sprang up, in less
than an hour, a strange harvest--an army of giants, as many as the
stalks of wheat in a wide field, who rushed upon Jason and the Greeks,
and trampled them to the ground.

And every one of them would have been slain had not Jason bethought
him of Medea's sling and stone. Aiming at the chief of the giants, he
let fly, and straightway the army vanished like the phantoms of a
dream.

The king began to be afraid, for he was coming to an end of his
spells. He felt sure he had been betrayed, but could not guess the
traitor. But again he pretended friendship, and said: "That, too, was
very well done. I see there is something in you Greeks, after all.
But it grieves me to the heart to tell you that the most terrible
guards of the Golden Fleece still remain--a mighty dragon that never
sleeps, but watches the Fleece night and day. If you can kill
_him_--why then--"

"I can but try," said Jason. So he and his comrades were guided by
winding paths to the foot of a tree on which hung the Golden Fleece,
splendid in the sun. But at the foot of the tree was a dragon that
could have devoured ten times as many, armor and all, with one crunch
of his jaws. And he breathed forth such fiery pestilence that none
could come near.

Truly it seemed at last as if the adventure was to be in vain.

But, at midnight, Medea came to Jason as before, and gave him another
herb, and said, "Take this--and remember your vow."

Jason was not thinking of the vow, but only of the dragon. The next
morning he set forth alone, and having found his way to the tree,
waved the herb before the monster. No sooner had the smell of it
reached its nostrils than its eyes began to droop and close, and
presently the ever-watchful dragon was sleeping soundly. Instantly
Jason darted past him, snatched the Golden Fleece from the tree, and
hastening back to the palace, displayed it before the king's
astonished eyes.

"Seize the robber!" cried King Æetes, to his guards. But he had come
to an end of his enchantments: Jason's comrades rallied round their
captain with drawn swords, and made for the shore.

The king raved and stormed. "Fetch Medea to me," he cried; "she shall
raise such a tempest as will sink the foreign pirates to the bottom of
the sea." But even as he spoke, in ran one of the slaves with the
news--

"The Princess Medea--the Greeks are carrying her away!"

"Medea--against her will? No!" cried the king, who now knew who had
betrayed him. "There is no power on earth that could make _her_
captive, or carry her away unless she chose to go. Absyrtus," he said,
turning to his son, "hasten after those brigands, and bid your sister
return, and I will follow with my whole army to cut them off from
their ship and destroy them all."

The news was true: Medea was so passionately in love with Jason that
she had forgotten her father and her country, and was even now guiding
the Greeks back to where the _Argo_ lay. But, great enchantress though
she was, she was not all-powerful, and she knew that her spells would
be in vain against her own people. And her father and her brother knew
this too.

Her ears were quick, however; and while the Greeks were still far from
the shore, she heard the footsteps of Absyrtus swiftly tracking them;
and what was worse, she heard, further off, a tramp and clash, which
told her that the whole Colchian army was in pursuit at full speed.

"Hasten on," she said to Jason. "I will wait here."

So, while he and the Greeks pressed forward, she faced round and stood
in the middle of the path until Absyrtus came up with her. Before he
could utter a word, she plunged a dagger into her brother's heart, cut
off his head and limbs, and then slowly followed Jason, dropping a
bleeding limb in the path every few yards.

Things happened just as she intended. When King Æetes, riding fast at
the head of his horsemen, saw his son's head lying in the path before
him, he threw himself from his horse with a cry of grief; and seeing
what lay further along the ground, forgot everything else, even the
Golden Fleece, in his sorrow. The cruel witch, Medea, had foreseen
that her father would never leave the remains of his dead son
ungathered and unburied by the wayside, for the advancing horses to
trample and for the vultures to devour. King Æetes was so long in
seeking for the last limb that, by the time it was found, Jason and
the Greeks had reached their ship and had set sail, and Medea with
them.

       *       *       *       *       *

But the murder of Absyrtus seemed to cling like a curse to the _Argo_,
and to keep her from coming home. Driven out of her course by storms
and contrary winds, she wandered into unknown oceans, drifting even so
far as the wild and desolate islands of Britain, in the mysterious
Northern Sea. The Argonauts narrowly escaped being devoured, ship and
all, by the horrible sea-fiend Scylla, with twelve feet, six hideous
heads, each with three rows of teeth, and a body made of barking dogs,
who sits upon a rock and watches for sailors. And, just avoiding her
jaws, they nearly fell into the whirlpool of Charybdis, another
sea-fiend, so close to Scylla that it was hardly possible to escape
one without being destroyed by the other. They passed the island of
the Sirens, of whom you read in the story of Neptune, and would have
fallen victims to their singing had not Orpheus made such music on his
lyre that the Sirens ceased their own song to listen, and let the ship
pass by.

I do not know what Medea was doing all this while. Perhaps she was
powerful only on land; perhaps she could do nothing without her magic
herbs; perhaps her passion for Jason had made her weak; perhaps she
felt some touch of remorse; perhaps her wicked witchcraft was of no
effect in the presence of Æsculapius, who, knowing more magic even
than she, used his knowledge for helping and healing. But I do know
that Jason was beginning to suffer sorely because of the vow he had
made of his faith and life to Medea, and to feel that murder and
black magic, and a wife whom he dreaded and did not love, were too
high a price to pay even for glory. He was not like Perseus, who had
warred against evil with the weapons of the gods: Jason had sought
only his own glory, and had gained it by means hateful to gods and
men.

But his comrades knew nothing of all this--to them he was a hero of
heroes, and they made the wanderings of the _Argo_ famous for
something better than narrow escapes from peril. They cleared the sea
of pirates--a work in which Castor and Pollux especially distinguished
themselves; and they righted many wrongs, and carried the knowledge of
the gods among far away barbarian tribes. And at last they saw once
more the coast of Greece; at last they touched the land of Calydon,
where the father of Meleager, one of the Argonauts whom I have already
named, was king.

Now this Meleager had a charmed life. The three Fates had been present
at his birth--the first had given him courage; the second, strength;
but the third had decreed that he should live only so long as a log of
wood, then burning upon the hearth, should remain unconsumed. So his
mother, Althæa, had forthwith snatched the brand from the burning, and
had kept it with care, because upon it depended the life of her son.
Meleager welcomed Jason and his companions to Calydon: but they no
sooner landed than they heard evil news. The whole country was being
laid waste by a huge boar, which not even armies could kill.

Here was another adventure for the Argonauts. They proclaimed a great
hunt, and tracked the boar, through mountains and forests, to his very
den. In front of the hunters was Meleager; but next to him came
Atalanta--that famous huntress, swift-footed as Diana, who had sailed
with the Argonauts in the disguise of a man, and had betrothed herself
to Meleager while they were homeward bound. Then followed the rest,
vying with each other which should be foremost; and besides the
Argonauts were the princes and nobles of Calydon, led by the two
brothers of Althæa, who still kept the fatal fire-brand secure.

They drove the boar to bay at last, and, after a desperate struggle,
Meleager gave it its death-blow. All his companions rejoiced at his
good fortune; but when he gave the boar's head, as a trophy, to
Atalanta, the two brothers of Althæa stood forth and said:--

"It is not right to give such honor to a woman--a woman who has no
more right to it than we. Such trophies are for men!"

So saying, they tried to seize it from her. But Meleager, enraged at
the insult to Atalanta, defended her with his sword, and so
unfortunately well that both his uncles were slain.

Althæa, watching from her window for the return of the hunters, at
last saw them pass mournfully, bearing the bodies of her dead
brothers. "Who has done this?" she cried; and being told it was
Meleager, she cursed him, and, in her grief and passion, threw the
fatal brand upon the hearth, where it was caught by a flame. Meleager,
though still far off, was forthwith seized with scorching pains in all
his limbs. As the brand burned, so he burned also, and when it was
consumed, a flame seemed to clutch his heart, and he fell dead in
Atalanta's arms.

Althæa, overwhelmed, when it was too late, with horror at the result
of her rage, slew herself with her own hand. And such was the
miserable ending of the Hunt of Calydon.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Argonauts, having now returned to Greece, parted, and went each to
his own home. Jason drew the _Argo_ on shore near Corinth,
consecrating it to Neptune, and leaving it there as a monument of so
famous a voyage. Then he returned to Iolcos, bringing the Golden
Fleece with him.

He was received with triumph and rejoicing, and a great feast was
prepared to welcome him home. But, to his sorrow, he found his father
Æson so enfeebled by old age as not to be able to be present at the
festival.

"Do not trouble yourself about that," said Medea. "Let Æson only put
himself in my hands, and he shall be as young as you."

Jason, knowing his wife's power, consented. So she drew all the blood
out of Æson's veins, and filled them with the juice of certain herbs;
and he came to the festival as young-looking and as vigorous as his
own son.

But Pelias, the usurper, who hated Jason, was getting old, too; and
his daughters, when they saw what had happened to Æson, besought Medea
that she would make their father also young and strong again.

"You need not come to me for that," said she. "You can do it for
yourselves when I have shown you how."

So she killed an old ram, cut him up, and boiled the pieces in a
caldron into which she had secretly thrown some herbs. When the water
was cold, out from the caldron skipped a young lamb, and frisked away.

The whole thing looked so easy that the daughters of Pelias, that very
night, prepared a caldron; and, when the water boiled, killed their
father, divided him limb from limb, and threw in the pieces, just as
Medea had done with the ram. But nothing happened, though they waited
till the flesh had boiled away from the bones.

They hastened to Medea to help them. But she received them with scorn.

"Murderesses!" she exclaimed, "and fools! It is you who butchered
Pelias; it is you who must make him live again, if you can. His death
is on your hands; not on mine."

Thus Jason was delivered from his enemy. But the manner of his
deliverance got about among the people. They rose up against Medea,
and drove her out of the city; and Jason had to follow her to whom he
had sold his soul for glory.

He had never loved her; and now his fear of her was turning into hate,
and the hate into loathing and horror. All the wickednesses and
cruelties she had committed for his sake seemed to have become his
own, and to be so many curses upon him. And even her magic had not
prospered, seeing that it had cost him the kingdom he might have
gained by fair means, and had driven him into exile. His only comfort
was in their two children, whom he loved dearly; and at last he could
bear life with the terrible Medea no longer. He determined to divorce
her; to take the children away from such a mother; and to take another
wife whom he could love, and who would not be a terror to him.

Such a wife he found in Creusa, a princess of Corinth. But he was
terribly mistaken if he thought he could break the vow he had made to
Medea at the altar of Hecate, the Witch-Queen.

Medea affected to be quite content with what had been arranged. She
sent Creusa a wedding-dress, and had her children brought to her to
bid them farewell. The feast was at its height, and Jason was
rejoicing in his freedom, when a cold cloud seemed to come over the
guests; and there stood Medea, dark and stern, leading her two
children by the hand.

"Traitor and perjurer!" she said to Jason, so that all the guests
could hear. "Is this your return for the love I have given you; for
the country I left for you; for the sins I have done for you--sins
that you took the fruits of, but were too cowardly to do? I have given
you to the last moment to prove your faith; and now the last moment
has gone. As you choose to be bound to me no longer, my own hands
shall destroy the last links that bind you and me."

So saying, like the tigress she was, she took up the children and
dashed them dead upon the floor. At the same moment Creusa shrieked
with the agony of the poisoned robe that was clinging to her and
destroying her. Jason rushed upon Medea with his sword. But before he
could reach her, a chariot drawn by flying dragons, none knew whence,
had borne her away, none knew whither, through the air.

       *       *       *       *       *

Jason, from that time, seemed haunted by the Furies. He wandered
aimlessly about the world, unable to rest, until one day his eyes
fell upon the ship _Argo_, still reposing peacefully upon the shore.
One may imagine all the things the sight brought to his mind--his old
dreams of glory; the unholy vow which had seemed to fulfill them; the
weakness and the unfaithfulness which had destroyed them, and him, and
others through him. Doubtless, he then saw in Medea not so much the
cruel witch as the evil of his own heart, which had taken shape and
form and had become a curse from which he could not get free. "If I
could only rest like you!" he cried out, falling on his knees before
the ship with bowed head and clasped hands. And it seemed as if the
_Argo_ heard her old captain's prayer. A yard dropped from the
mainmast upon his bowed head: and ship and captain lay at rest
together.




A LOST SECRET.


Minos, the chief judge of the Court of the Dead in Hades, had been
during his life the King of Crete--that large island where Jupiter had
been hidden from Saturn. Before the reign of Minos the Cretans had
been a number of rude and savage tribes, brigands by land and pirates
by sea. He, however, made a single nation of them, civilized them,
suppressed brigandage and piracy, built cities, formed a regular army
and navy, and gave his people a code of wise and just laws which never
had to be changed.

When he, for his justice and his knowledge of law, was made chief
judge in Hades, he was succeeded in his kingdom of Crete by his son,
Minos the Second. He also was a great and powerful king. He conquered
many of the neighboring islands, adding them to his dominions, and
made war upon the Athenians, whom he defeated utterly. One of his sons
having been killed in that war, he took a cruel revenge upon the
vanquished enemy. He laid a tribute upon the city of Athens; and the
tribute was that the Athenians should send him every year seven boys
and seven girls to be devoured by a monster called the Minotaur--a
creature half man and half bull.

       *       *       *       *       *

When this savage monster first appeared, Minos had been sorely puzzled
what to do with such a scourge. Nobody could kill it; and unless it
was regularly supplied with a full meal of boys and girls, its fury
became uncontrollable. It was partly to keep the Minotaur quiet that
he had exacted that particular tribute from his enemies. But neither
were the Cretan children safe while the Minotaur was at large.

One day, however, there came to the Court of Minos a stranger who gave
his name as Dædalus, an Athenian, and announced himself as having fled
from his native city to escape a charge of murder. He was accompanied
by a young man, his son, whom he called Icarus; and he asked for
whatever employment the king might choose to give him.

"What can you do?" asked Minos.

"Three things," said Dædalus. "I can split the hardest rocks; I can
make ships go without oars; and out of wood and metal I can make
living men."

"Prove your words," said Minos; "and if you do these things I shall
take both you and your son into my service, and pay you well."

Dædalus bowed, and obtained leave to set up a forge, where he and
Icarus were soon heard working all night and all day. If the
listeners could have looked in, they would have been surprised. He was
making nothing more wonderful than pieces of iron, sharp at one end
and thick at the other. When he had made enough, he summoned the king
and his Court to see him split the biggest and hardest rock they could
find on the sea-shore.

They fixed upon a granite cliff. Dædalus put the sharp end of one of
his pieces of iron into one of the smallest cracks in the face of the
cliff, and hammered upon the blunt end till he had driven it home.
Then between this and the stone he drove in another piece of iron; and
between these two a third; and so on, and so on, while the rock began
to gape, and then to split, until the upper portion parted itself from
the lower, and thundered down into the sea.

The secret was simple enough. Dædalus had simply invented the _wedge_,
which can do much greater things than that when it is skillfully used.
But the Cretans were amazed to see, as they thought, one man knocking
over a cliff with a common hammer.

Then Dædalus set up a workshop by the shore, with some long sheds, and
a supply of hemp and timber. Here also he worked day and night; and at
last called Minos and his Court to see a ship go without oars.

The ship had a tall pole rising from the middle of the deck. Dædalus
and Icarus went on board, and were seen pulling at some long ropes;
and presently the ship seemed to spread out wings like a bird, and to
skim over the water as fast as the wind without the help of an oar.

Dædalus had invented _sails_. But the Cretans were more amazed than
before, never having thought of such a simple thing for themselves.

Dædalus then went back to his forge; and what he did there nobody
could guess, for scarce a sound was heard. After many days, however,
he went to the king's palace, he and Icarus carrying a long and heavy
chest between them. The chest being opened before Minos, Dædalus took
out from it a number of images, exquisitely wrought in wood, bronze,
ivory, silver, and gold--men and women; fauns, nymphs, animals;
creatures of all sorts and kinds.

When Minos had looked at them and admired them, Dædalus touched them
one after another; and then, with a whirring noise, the images seemed
to live. The nymphs and satyrs joined hands, and danced in a ring
round a bronze Pan who piped to them; a number of wooden young men
boxed and wrestled: in short--

In short, Dædalus had invented _clock-work_. But the Cretans were more
amazed than ever, and stood staring, half delighted, half frightened,
till he put up the figures in their box again.

"You are the man for me!" exclaimed Minos. "I said I would take you
into my own service; and I will. You shall make a cage for the
Minotaur!"

This was certainly not the reward which Dædalus had looked for.
However, he said nothing, but again shut himself up, this time with
writing materials, compasses, and rules. After a long time he got a
body of workmen together, and built a Labyrinth--a mass of passages
and windings so contrived that nobody who was outside could find the
way in, and nobody who was once inside could find the way out again.
Nobody, that is to say, unless he had the clue, which was of course to
be kept secret. The clue which Dædalus invented--and a very good sort
it was--was a long silken thread, with one end fastened to the center
of the Labyrinth, carried along all the windings to the entrance.
Anybody wishing to get in would have to know this, and in which of the
many entrances (for there were hundreds of false ones) he must look
for the hidden end of the thread. Then all he would have to do would
be to wind up the thread into a ball, following it as he wound, until
he reached the middle of the maze. And of course there was another
clue to lead him out again in the same way. The middle of the
Labyrinth was a hall with many columns, and an opening in the roof to
let in light and air. This Labyrinth having been finished, Dædalus
enticed the Minotaur into the central hall, locked him up there, and
gave Minos the key.

So the Cretan children were safe, and the monster had to be content
with his fourteen young Athenians every year.

Dædalus kept on doing work after work for Minos, inventing one thing
after another, until the queen, who was a wicked woman, persuaded
Dædalus to help her in some piece of wickedness which was discovered
by the king. Whatever the affair was, it was kept secret to prevent a
Court scandal. The king's anger fell upon Dædalus and Icarus, both of
whom he imprisoned in their own Labyrinth--not, I suppose, in the same
chamber with the Minotaur.

Indeed I am sure not; because if they had been in the same chamber,
Dædalus could have got out by means of the clue. But there was no clue
to the chamber where he was imprisoned, and he had built the Labyrinth
so cleverly that he himself was lost in its mazes.

Poor Icarus was in despair. But Dædalus only sat down on the base of a
column and thought things over in his usual silent and quiet way.
After thinking for some days, until they were nearly starved, he set
Icarus wondering by doing as follows, in order:--

First, with one of his wedges, he chipped off pieces of stone from the
columns.

Secondly, he, in the same way, broke the fragments into pieces of
nearly the same size, rounding them roughly.

Thirdly, from a strip of his coat he made a sling.

Fourthly, he watched the opening in the roof, and whenever a bird
passed overhead he discharged a stone, and generally brought it down.

Fifthly, when he had got a sufficient number of birds, he plucked out
and sorted their wing-feathers.

Sixthly, he collected all the wax-candles in the chamber, and melted
them in a fire which he obtained by some secret invention of his own.

Seventhly--but what he did seventhly Icarus could not see.

At last, however, his mysterious work, whatever it was, seemed done.
There lay before him two pairs of wings, beautifully made of wax and
feathers.

"I have long thought," said Dædalus, "how to invent a method of
flying. I am glad of this imprisonment, which has obliged me to fix my
whole mind upon it without interruption."

"You have found out how to fly--and with wings like those!" exclaimed
Icarus in amaze.

"With these very wings. Why not? Science always looks simple. What can
look more simple than a wedge, a sail, a clock-spring? Fasten those
wings on your shoulders with the wax, just as you see me fasten these
on mine. There. Now open them; do you not feel as if you could reach
the clouds? Spread them--mount--fly!"

So saying, he soared up through the opening in the roof, Icarus
following him, and steered westward, higher and higher through the
air. It was morning when they started; by noon they were over the sea
out of sight of land.

"Take care!" cried Dædalus. "Don't fly _too_ high!"

But Icarus, reveling in all the delights of a sea-gull--nay, of an
eagle--soared higher and higher towards the noontide sun. In vain
Dædalus called upon him to come lower. He only laughed at his father
for being timid and cautious, and soared higher and higher still
towards the blazing sky.

Suddenly he felt his wings weakening--the wax was melting in the heat
of the sun. He tried to spread them, so as to let himself down safely.
They hung soft and limp, and down he came headlong into the sea.

"It's quite clear that one must think of something stronger than wax,"
thought Dædalus, as he saw Icarus sink and drown. "Well--I've lost my
son, but I've gained a wrinkle." Taking care to fly as low as he
could, he himself reached the island of Sicily, where he set up
another forge, found another king to keep him going, and invented so
many wonderful things that to this very day nobody knows what they
were.

As for his flying-machine, nobody else has come so near to one as even
wax and feathers.




THE CHAMPION OF ATHENS.


Æthra, a daughter of the King of Trœzene, was the wife of a foreign
prince, and the mother of an only child, a boy, whom they named
Thēseus. While Theseus was still an infant, his father said one day
to Æthra--

"I am obliged to set off on a long and distant journey, through
countries infested by wild beasts and robbers. If I should never
return, take care of our child, bring him up like a king's son, and
send him to the city of Athens as soon as he grows strong enough to
lift that stone."

Æthra promised, and her husband left Trœzene never to return.

       *       *       *       *       *

Having given up all hope of seeing her husband again, Æthra devoted
herself to obeying his last commands. She gave Theseus the education
of a prince; and every day, from the time he left her arms, she made
him try to lift the stone. The child grew up to be the handsomest,
strongest, and bravest youth in all the land, so that he had not a
rival of his own age in all manly sports and feats of arms. But he
could no more move the stone than he could fly.

At last, however, the moment came when the stone gave way a little.
The next day he raised it a trifle further, and so on until he lifted
it bodily from the ground, and rolled it away. Underneath it he found
a splendid sword, with a curiously carved hilt, unlike any he had ever
seen.

The time had therefore come for him to set out for Athens, according
to his father's commands. His mother implored him to go by sea, and
not by those perilous paths by which her husband had never returned.
But Theseus was only tempted by the dangers; and so, taking the sword
with him, he set out for Athens overland.

After a long journey through a wild and difficult country, he reached
a village, where he sought for supper and a night's lodging. But the
place seemed deserted, and it was only after a long search that he
discovered an old shepherd, of whom he asked where a traveler might
find food and shelter.

"Alas!" answered the shepherd, "there is not a scrap of food left in
the place, not a house left unplundered. For Sciron has been here."

"And who is Sciron?" asked Theseus.

"Ah, you must be a stranger indeed! Sciron is the chief of all the
robbers. Do you see yonder castle among the mountains? That is where
he lives, and thence he issues forth, when he wants food for his
gluttony, to plunder and lay waste all the country round. And he is as
cruel and savage as he is greedy. Not content with carrying off our
cattle and our stores of corn and wine, he seizes men and women, and
makes them wait upon him while he feasts; and when the feast is over,
he amuses himself by throwing them from a high rock into the sea."

"Thank you," said Theseus. "Then I will sup with Sciron." And off he
started for the robber's castle, leaving the amazed shepherd to think
him a madman.

It was a long climb to the castle, which stood on the peak of a high
cliff looking down into the sea. Theseus knocked upon the gate with
the hilt of his sword, and, when it was opened by a ferocious-looking
brigand, announced himself as a stranger who requested hospitality.

"You've come to the right place for that!" said the brigand, grimly.
"Come with me."

Theseus followed him into the hall, where broth was being brewed in
caldrons, and a fat ox was being roasted whole. The robbers were all
about--some preparing the feast, some already carousing, some
quarreling over their plunder, some sprawling about the floor. In the
midst of all the steam and din sat the chief, a huge and
cruel-looking brute, whom Theseus did not need to be told was Sciron.

"So you want hospitality, do you?" asked Sciron. "Very well, as you're
a traveler, and don't know the ways of the castle, you shall be let
off easily. Of course you'll have to be thrown from the cliff after
supper--that's the rule. But instead of being tortured, you shall only
wash my feet for me and wait on me at table. You look as if you
understood washing and how things ought to be served. Now, then, get
some hot water and begin," he said, thrusting out a pair of feet which
looked as if they had not been touched by water for years.

A grinning robber brought a bowl of hot water. Theseus took it and
threw it in the face of Sciron. "That wants washing, too," said he.

Sciron rushed at him; but Theseus received him at the point of his
sword, and the two fought furiously, while the robbers looked on,
enjoying the game. Sciron was twice the size and weight of Theseus;
but Theseus was the best swordsman in all Greece, and presently had
him down.

"There," said he, pricking Sciron's throat with his sword, "you have
had a lesson in manners. You shall wash _my_ feet and wait on _me_
before you go over the cliff after your victims. For I am not going
away to leave a brigand like you alive behind me."

Sciron, like all such bullies, was a coward at heart, and his own men
had no longer any respect for him now that he had been worsted by a
stripling. Amid the laughter of the robbers, he had to wash the feet
of Theseus, and to serve him humbly with meat and drink, and was
finally punished for his many cruel murders by being thrown into the
sea.

Having received the thanks of the country for ridding it of such a
scourge, Theseus traveled on till he came to another village, where he
thought he would rest a little.

No sooner had he entered the place, however, than he was surrounded by
a number of armed men, who gave him to understand that he was their
prisoner.

"Is this the way you treat travelers in your country?" asked he.

"Assuredly," answered the captain of the troop. "You are in the
country of King Cercyon, and the law is that no traveler may leave it
until he has wrestled with the king."

"I ask for nothing better," said Theseus. "What happens to the
traveler if he conquers Cercyon?"

"Then he may pass on."

"But if Cercyon conquers him?"

"Then he is tortured till he dies."

"It is strange," said Theseus, "that I never heard of such a law, or
even of King Cercyon."

"Not at all strange," said the captain. "I don't see how you could
have heard it, seeing that no traveler has ever lived to tell the
tale. Cercyon has conquered and killed them all, as he will conquer
and kill you."

And when he saw Cercyon Theseus could well believe it. The king was of
immense height, with broad shoulders, and muscles that stood out like
globes of iron. He smiled savagely when he saw Theseus, and stripped
without a word. Theseus stripped also, and the two were soon clasping
each other like a pair of fierce bears, or rather like a bear and a
man.

It was a tremendous struggle, with all the brute strength on the side
of Cercyon. But Theseus knew a hundred turns and twists of which the
savage chieftain knew nothing; and at last, to the amazement of all
who witnessed the struggle, Cercyon fell dead upon the ground with a
broken spine. Thenceforth every traveler might pass through that
country safely and without fear.

Theseus traveled on until he found himself benighted in a wild
country, through which he wandered about until he reached a castle,
where he craved a night's shelter. Here he was kindly received, and
told that the lord of the castle and of the country round was one
Procrustes, who never turned a traveler from his door; nay, even now
there were two guests with him. And so it proved. Procrustes
entertained Theseus and the other two travelers at supper pleasantly
and generously, and when it was time to retire for the night, himself
conducted them into a chamber, where a bed, with nothing remarkable
about it, stood ready in a corner.

"That is the guest-bed," said Procrustes; "and I hope it will fit
you."

"Fit us?" asked Theseus, puzzled.

"Yes; it is the law of the country that if the bed does not fit the
traveler, the traveler must be made to fit the bed. Do you try the bed
first," he said to one of the guests, the tallest of the three.

The traveler lay down, but found the bed rather short, and had to draw
up his knees a little. "Be good enough to lie straight," said
Procrustes. He did so, his feet appearing beyond the bottom. Instantly
Procrustes, with a sharp hatchet, chopped them off, one after another.
"You'll fit nicely now," said he. "It's your turn next," he said to
the second traveler.

This one thought himself safe; for, being short, his toes did not
reach the bed's end by a full two inches. Procrustes gave a signal,
and immediately two strong attendants seized the unfortunate man, one
by the shoulders and the other by the legs, and proceeded to pull him
out to the proper length, despite his yells of pain.

"Stretch him on the rack," said Procrustes. "Now," he said to
Theseus, "it is your turn in the game, and I hope, for your sake, you
will give less trouble than the rest of them."

Theseus had been taken aback at first by these extraordinary
proceedings; but he now perceived that he had fallen upon another of
those brigand chiefs who infested the country, and who resembled ogres
rather than mere cruel and blood-thirsty savages.

So he drew his sword and closed with Procrustes; nor did he cease
fighting till he had fitted the robber to his own bed by making him a
whole head shorter. The robbers in the place, cowed by the death of
their chief, submitted to Theseus, who went round the castle, and set
at liberty hundreds of maimed victims of the slain monster's cruelty.

Having received such thanks as they could give him, he journeyed on
and on until at last he reached Athens. What he was to do there he did
not know; but there was no need for him to ask. Somehow the fame of
his deeds had flown before him,--how he had rid the country of Sciron
and Cercyon and Procrustes, and other wild beasts and brigands, and he
was received as befitted his valor.

Now the King of Athens at that time was Ægeus; and the queen was no
other than the great and dreadful sorceress Medea, who had come to
Athens after the murder of her children, and had married the king.
Ægeus took a fancy to Theseus from the young stranger's first
appearance in Athens, gave him a high place at Court, and treated him
as if he had been his own son. But with Medea it was different. She
had a son of her own, and she was filled with jealousy lest Ægeus
should make Theseus the heir to his throne. Moreover, she envied and
hated him for his courage and his fame, in which he so far surpassed
her own son Medus; and she feared him too, for she failed to bring him
under her spells. So she plotted to destroy him in such a way that his
death should never be brought home to her, just as she had made the
daughters of Pelias the seeming murderesses of their own father.

She therefore pretended a great admiration for Theseus, and got the
king to hold a great festival in his honor. It was arranged that
Ægeus, during the feast, should send him a golden cup filled with
wine, in which Medea secretly steeped one of her deadliest poisons.

All went as she had planned. Ægeus sent the poisoned goblet by one of
the cup-bearers to Theseus, who stood up to drink the health of the
king and queen. But--

"Hold!" suddenly cried Ægeus, starting; "what sword is that at your
side?"

Theseus put down the cup to answer:--

"It is the sword with which I fought my way to Athens. I wear it
to-day as my sword of honor."

"But how comes it at _your_ side?"

Then Theseus told the story of how it had been left by his unknown
father under a stone at Trœzene, and how his mother's name was
Æthra. Scarcely had he finished when Ægeus, leaving his throne, fell
upon his neck, exclaiming:--

"I was that father! You are my first-born son, and the heir to my
crown!"

The Athenians, who already looked upon Theseus as their national hero,
greeted their prince and future king with shouts of joy; and when the
first excitement was over, Medea was seen no more. Enraged at the
failure of her plot, and fearing discovery and vengeance, she vanished
from Athens: some said they had seen her borne by dragons through the
air. And this is the last of her.

Freed from her evil influence, the old love of Ægeus for Æthra
revived, and he could not make enough of his and Æthra's son. But
Theseus did not become idle, and became in all ways the champion and
protector of his father's people. It was he who caught alive the
famous wild bull of Marathon, which had ravaged the country for years,
and sacrificed it to Minerva. He never spared himself, and he never
failed.

At last, however, drew nigh that evil hour of Athens--that day in
every year when the seven youths and seven maidens had to be sent to
King Minos of Crete to be devoured by the Minotaur. The rule was to
choose the victims by lot: so that none felt safe who had sons and
daughters young enough to suit the taste of the monster. The seven
girls were first chosen. But when it came to drawing lots for the
youths, Theseus said:--

"You need draw only six this year. I will myself be the seventh. It
may be that I shall find a way to deliver Athens from this tribute; if
not, it is for a prince who cannot save his people to perish with
them."

Ægeus was in despair. But no entreaties could turn Theseus from his
desperate resolve: neither the prayers of his own father, nor those of
all the fathers and mothers in Athens, who would have drawn the
seventh lot rather than he who was the pride and hope of the city
should go to certain destruction. The ship which bore the yearly
victims to Crete always carried black sails in token of public
mourning. Theseus, in order to leave a little hope behind him,
promised that, if he came back alive, he would hoist a white sail
while returning, so that his safety might be seen from afar. Then, in
solemn procession, amid the weeping of the crowd, the youths and
maidens embarked in the black-sailed ship, Theseus leading them with
the calmness of the only true courage--that which can, in cold blood,
face danger for the sake of duty. None would have thought the worse of
him had he stayed behind: and if he perished it would be as a mere
victim, and without glory. Nor was it as if he were encouraged by any
oracles, or helped by gifts from the gods. He is the first hero who
was both a mere man and who never had any help but his own manfulness.
And for all these reasons I think that his voyage to Crete is the
finest story I have yet told.

       *       *       *       *       *

When the ship reached Crete, the fourteen victims were conducted to
the Labyrinth, there to be imprisoned until they should be given to
the Minotaur. As they passed before Minos and his Court, the king's
youngest daughter, Ariadne, was filled with pity and love for Theseus,
and set her thoughts to work how she might save him from his doom. But
how in the world was such a thing to be done? None without the clue
could either enter or escape from the maze: and even were that
possible, it was not likely that the Minotaur would let himself be
balked of his prey.

But she watched and waited: she hovered round the Labyrinth night
after night, examining every door: until at last she was rewarded by
finding, just within one of them, a little silken skein hidden away in
a dark corner. The next night, having procured a torch and a sword,
she bravely entered the door where the skein was, and, by winding up
the silk, followed the clue. Through one twisting passage after
another she wandered on and on, up and down long flights of steps,
sometimes through great halls confused with columns, and sometimes
through tunnels in which it was scarcely possible to stand. There
seemed no end to the way. At last, however, the end of the silken
thread told her that she had reached the inmost hall: and there her
torch showed a sight that froze her with fear.

The victims had been delivered over to the Minotaur. Crowded together
in a corner of the hall were six youths and seven girls: stamping and
tossing his horned head was the horrible monster, furious with hunger
and the sight of human food. Between the Minotaur and his despairing
prey stood Theseus, facing the monster, so that he, by being the first
victim, might prolong the lives of the others. He had no hope: he
could not even struggle, for his hands were bound behind him with
cords.

The sight of his courage gave back Ariadne hers. She darted forward,
and cut his bonds with her sword. "Fly!" she cried: "follow me--I have
the clue!" But as soon as Theseus felt the touch of the steel, he
seized the sword from her hand, and, instead of flying, set upon the
Minotaur with such fury that the monster bellowed with rage,
amazement, and pain.

It was the hardest fight Theseus had ever fought: the wild bull of
Marathon had been nothing to the Minotaur, who fought with a bull's
strength and a man's skill and cunning. But the champion of Athens
prevailed at last: and the monster fell dead with a groan which echoed
through the Labyrinth like the bellowing of thunder.

"It will wake the whole city!" cried Ariadne: "follow me!" Theseus and
his companions, scarce knowing that they were saved, followed Ariadne,
who wound up the clue as she ran. When they reached the entrance-gate,
the alarm of their escape had been given. Making straight for the
shore, they found their black-sailed ship, sped on board, and, thanks
to a kindly wind, were out at sea before they could be pursued.

       *       *       *       *       *

The wind carried them to the island of Naxos: and here they
remained--Theseus, Ariadne, and the rest--till the breeze should blow
towards Athens. Such a breeze came in time; and then Theseus set sail
for home with his thirteen companions, leaving Ariadne behind, to her
great sorrow. Nor can anything make me believe that he meant this for
a real parting, or that she thought so. One can think of many reasons
why she should remain in Naxos for a while: it is quite certain that
her powerful father Minos, who had already conquered the Athenians,
and shown, by a cruel vengeance, how he hated them, would have
attacked them again with all his fleets and armies if he had heard
that they were giving shelter to a daughter who had betrayed him. So,
leaving Ariadne safe in Naxos, Theseus returned to Athens as the
savior of his city and the slayer of the Minotaur.

Meanwhile his father, Ægeus, had been every day and all day long
looking out to sea from the farthest point of the shore for the return
from Crete of the ship of mourning. He had but little hope, but nobody
can help having a little: nor did he quite despair until one morning
he saw on the horizon a vessel which he felt sure was the one he was
watching for in such agony of mind. Nearer and nearer it came--alas!
its sails were still as black as when it was outward bound. Theseus
had forgotten to hoist the white sail which was to be the sign of
safety.

So Ægeus, giving up his son for lost, threw himself into the sea and
perished, just when Theseus was within sight of home. And that sea is
called the Ægean, or the Sea of Ægeus, to this day. And thus Theseus,
to the joy of the people, but with sorrow in his own heart, found
himself king.

And the best of kings he made. The strength of his rule was only
equaled by its gentleness. He made wise laws; he took care that all
men received justice; he honored the gods; he obtained the respect and
friendship of foreign nations; he taught the Athenians to be free, and
to govern themselves, so that when he died they remained as great a
people as while he was alive.

He sent for his mother, Æthra, and kept her in all love and honor. I
wish I could tell you that he sent for Ariadne also. But he never had
any other wife: and she was lost to him. There is a strange,
mysterious story of how, when she was left sorrowing in Naxos, the god
Bacchus (of whom you read in the First Story of Midas)--the god of the
bounty of Nature and of the joy that men and women find in
her--comforted Ariadne, and made her his bride, and raised her above
the earth, giving her a crown of seven stars, which is still to be
seen in the sky, and is called "Ariadne's Crown."

And there is a yet stranger story of how Theseus, after he was king,
had the very wildest of all adventures--nothing less than an attempt
to rescue from Hades the goddess Proserpine, and other imprisoned
souls. But what happened to him there, and how he escaped the
punishment of his daring, belongs to another story. It is as the hero
and champion of Athens that he is remembered: and as such we will
leave him.




THE HERO OF HEROES.


PART I.--THE ORACLE.

Perseus and Andromeda had two sons, Alcæus, King of Thebes, and
Electryon, King of Argos and Mycenæ. Alcæus had a son named
Amphitryon, and Electryon had a daughter named Alcmena. These two
cousins--Amphitryon and Alcmena--married; and Jupiter resolved that
they should have a son who should be the greatest and most famous of
men.

But Juno was in one of her jealous moods; and she was especially
jealous that such favor should be shown to Alcmena. Having considered
how she should spoil his plan, she came to Jupiter in seeming
good-humor, and said:--

"I have a question to ask you. Of two first cousins, which shall rule
the other, and which shall serve--the elder or the younger?"

"Why, of course, the elder must rule the younger," answered Jupiter.

"You swear that--by the Styx?" asked Juno.

"By the Styx," Jupiter answered, wondering what she could mean by
what seemed so trifling a question, and then thinking no more of the
matter. But Juno knew what she meant very well. Alcmena had a brother,
Sthenelus, who had married the Princess Nicippe of Phrygia. And Juno
said to herself, "They also may have a son as well as Alcmena. Then
the two boys would be first cousins; and Jupiter has sworn that the
first-born shall rule the other. So if Nicippe has a son first,
Alcmena's son will have to serve him and obey him: and then, O
Jupiter, there will be a greater man than Alcmena's son; for he who
rules must be greater than he who obeys."

Now it is Juno herself who settles when children shall come into the
world. It was easy, therefore, for her to manage so that Nicippe's son
should be born two whole months before Alcmena's. Jupiter was enraged
when, too late, he found what a trick had been played upon him; but he
had sworn by the Styx--the oath which could not be broken. Thus it
became the will of heaven that the son of Alcmena should be the
servant of the son of Nicippe.

The son of Nicippe was named Eurystheus: the son of Alcmena was named
Hercules.

About the childhood of Eurystheus there was nothing remarkable. But
when Hercules and his twin-brother, Iphicles, were only eight months
old, the whole palace of Amphitryon was alarmed by the screams of
Iphicles, which brought Alcmena and the whole household running into
the room where the two children had been left alone. They saw a
strange sight indeed. Poor Iphicles was found half dead with fright in
a corner; and no wonder, for Hercules was being attacked by two huge
serpents which were trying to crush him to death in their coils. But
so far from being frightened, Hercules had got one of his baby hands
round the neck of each serpent right and left; and so he quietly
throttled them till they lay dead upon the floor. And this at only
eight months old!

His strength grew with him till it became a marvel like that of Samson
among the children of Israel, and in bulk and stature also he towered
over all other men. Like many who are large and strong, he was grave
and somewhat silent, using, when he spoke, but few words, not easily
moved either to action or to anger, but, when once roused, then roused
indeed. One seems to think of him as of some great lion. As for
training, he had the best that could be given him. Castor taught him
how to use the sword; Pollux, how to use his fists; Eurytus, the
finest archer in the world, taught him to shoot; Autolycus, to ride
and drive. Nor were accomplishments forgotten; for Linus, the brother
and pupil of Orpheus, taught him to play the lyre, and Eumolpus to
sing. Finally, he was sent to finish his education under Chiron, the
Centaur, who had taught Jason, and indeed nearly all the heroes of
that age.

At eighteen he was already famous for his strength, his
accomplishments, and his promise of a great career. But he was far
from perfect in other ways. One finds nothing of the knightliness of
his great-grandfather Perseus, or of Theseus, in this strong young
giant full of pride and passion, feeling himself already greater than
the best of his fellow-creatures, and looking upon the world as if it
were made for him alone. He would allow of no opposition to his least
desire; he did not desire glory so much as power. Good-tempered as he
mostly was, it was not safe to provoke him, as Linus, his
music-master, found, who had his own lyre broken upon his head for
presuming to correct his pupil a little too sharply.

Hercules now began to think of adventures worthy of his strength, and
presently, as if to give him one, a lion came forth from the forests
of Mount Cithæron, and ravaged the lands of Thespius, a neighboring
king. To hunt and kill it unaided was child's-play to Hercules. And
other services he did to the country, of small account in his own eyes
but great in those of others; so that Creon, who was then King of
Thebes, gave him his daughter in marriage, and made him his viceroy.

But Nicippe's son, Eurystheus, now king of Argos and Mycenæ,
remembered that he had a right to his younger cousin's services by
the oath of Jupiter. So Eurystheus sent a message to Hercules,
commanding him to come forthwith to Mycenæ, and become the king's
servant there.

Hercules, as may well be supposed, haughtily refused to obey this
insolent order. Why should he, the ruler of Thebes, already the most
famous man in all Greece, as well as the strongest, make a sort of
slave of himself to a kinsman whom he scorned? For Eurystheus was just
a commonplace person, with even less than common courage, who only
wanted to feed his own vanity by having in his service such a man as
Hercules to do whatever he bade. "Hercules may be master of Greece;
but I am master of Hercules," was the sort of boast that ran in his
mind.

I have said it was not strange that Hercules flatly refused to go to
Mycenæ at his cousin's bidding. But it was more than strange that,
from this moment, he began to fall into so strange a state of mind
that any one would think he was being haunted by the Furies, until he,
the pride of Thebes and the hope of Greece, became a dangerous madman,
whom none dared approach for fear of being slain. And all the time his
strength still increased; so that it seemed as if he had come into the
world to be a terror and a curse to mankind.

Many dreadful things he did in his madness. And when at length the
frenzy passed from him, he was left in a more dreadful condition
still. He was in an agony of remorse for all the violence he had done,
and believed himself to be accursed and an outcast from his
fellow-men. Melancholy and despairing, he fled from Thebes, and
wandered out alone among the forests and the mountains. And thus he
lived like a savage, hiding himself away from the sight of men.

The time came when he thought he could bear life no longer. He felt as
if he were hunted by demons, and with the scourges of Hades. In his
last despair he wandered to Delphi, in whose temple Apollo's oracle,
or living voice, was heard; and implored the gods to tell him what he
should do.

And the voice of Apollo answered him and said:--

"O Hercules! those things were not sins which you did in your madness.
Your madness is not sin, but the punishment for your real sin--the sin
of pride, and self-love, and defiance of the will of Heaven. In
rebelling against Eurystheus, you have rebelled against the gods, who
decreed even before your birth that he should rule and you should
serve. Is it not so, always? are not oftentimes the good made subject
to the wicked, the wise to the foolish, the strong and valiant to the
weak and craven? This is the oracle--the gods give each man his own
different place and work: to you they have appointed service--therefore
Obey. Seek not to know why this should be, nor question the justice of
the gods. Know your duty, and do it with your might; and so you will be
great enough; for no man can do more than serve the gods with such
strength as they have given him."

       *       *       *       *       *

For long Hercules stood before the altar, doing battle with his pride.
Then, at last, he took the road to Mycenæ. And as he went, each step
became quicker, his heart grew lighter, the shadow left his soul, and
his peace of mind returned.


PART II.--HIS FIRST LABOR: THE LION.

Hercules, being arrived at Mycenæ, submitted himself to Eurystheus,
who, to tell the truth, was a little alarmed at the sight of his
cousin, and suspicious of what such sudden submission might mean. And
he was all the more bewildered when he saw the humility with which his
kinsman approached him. Hercules could not do anything by halves; and
in Eurystheus he saw, not a mere insignificant, timid, mean-minded
man, but only the master whom the gods had appointed to him.

"And now," asked Hercules, in his impatience to prove his obedience,
"what do you order me to do?"

One would think that Eurystheus would have acted generously. So far
from that, however, he thought to himself, "I had better send him on
the most dangerous adventure I can think of. If he succeeds, it will
be the more glory for me to have such a man under my power; and
besides, it will prove whether this submission is real or sham. And if
he perishes--well, I shall be safe from danger at his hands." So he
said:--

"You have proved yourself a good lion-hunter. Bring me the carcass of
the Nemean lion."

Now the lion of the forest of Nemea was far more terrible than the
lion of Mount Cithæron. However, Hercules set out at once for the
forest, glad that his first service was one of honor.

Eurystheus was quite relieved when he was gone; and, sending for
skilled workmen, bade them make for him a large brazen pot, big enough
to hold him comfortably, and with an opening just large enough for him
to get in and out by. For he thought to himself, "If Hercules ever
gets angry or rebellious, I can creep into my brazen pot, and be safe
there."

Hercules was not long in finding the lion--the largest, strongest, and
fiercest ever seen in the world. He let fly an arrow, but it scarcely
pricked the beast's tough hide; then another, and another; but the
lion minded them no more than if they had been shot by a child from a
toy bow. At last one, however, pricked him sharply enough to enrage
him, and he came on with a rush and a roar. All Hercules had time to
do was to pull up a young oak-tree by the roots, for a weapon to meet
the charge. The next moment the lion sprang. But Hercules stood his
ground, and so belabored the lion with his club that he fairly beat it
back into its den, into which he followed it. Then was there a fearful
wrestle between Hercules and the lion. But Hercules prevailed, by
getting his arms round the lion and crushing its breath out of its
body.

Throwing the corpse over his shoulders, and holding it by bringing
the fore-legs round his neck, he returned to Mycenæ. Thus equipped, he
himself looked like some monstrous lion; and so terrified was
Eurystheus at the news that he crept into his brass pot, and in this
manner received Hercules, to whom he talked through a speaking-tube in
the side.

"Go and kill the Hydra!" he called out.

So Hercules set out on his second labor: and Eurystheus crept out of
his pot again.


PART III.--HIS SECOND LABOR: THE HYDRA.

Now the Hydra was more formidable than the lion--nobody in his senses
would dream of attacking it with the least hope of succeeding. It was
a huge water-snake which lived in Lake Lerna, whence it used to issue
to seek for human food. It had a hundred heads, and from each of its
hundred mouths darted a forked tongue of flame, dripping with deadly
poison.

I said that nobody in his senses would attack the Hydra. But I was not
quite right. There was just one sense which would lead a man to attack
any evil, even without hope--of course I mean the sense of Duty. And
it was in that sense that Hercules set forth for Lake Lerna. But he
did not go to work without ample forethought, and taking all the
precautions he could think of. He remembered the thickness and
toughness of the Nemean lion's skin; so he had it made into a sort of
cloak, which served him for armor better than brass or steel. He also
made the young oak-tree into a regular club, which thenceforth became
his favorite weapon. And instead of going alone, he took with him his
friend and kinsman Iolas, to act as his squire. You may always know
Hercules in pictures and statues by his knotted club and his
lion-skin.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was easy enough to find the Hydra--only too easy. It had its nest
in a foul stagnant swamp, the air of which its breath turned to
poison. Giving Iolas his other arms to hold, Hercules attacked the
Hydra with his club alone, trusting to his lion-skin to receive the
strokes of the creature's fangs. With a tremendous blow he crushed one
of the Hydra's hundred heads, leaving ninety-nine more to destroy if
he could hold out so long. That was bad enough to think of--but, to
his dismay, out of the crushed head sprang two new living heads: and
out of each of these, when he beat them to pieces, sprang forth two
more. And so it was with every head the Hydra had: so that, in truth,
the more Hercules destroyed it, the stronger it grew--its hundred
heads were rapidly becoming a thousand; and the thousand would become
ten thousand; and so on, forever.

Just as Hercules realized the hopelessness of the labor, and was
finding it work enough to ward off the innumerable fangs, a wretched
crab crawled out of the ooze and seized him by the foot, so that he
almost fainted with the sudden pain. It was too cruel, in the midst
of such a battle as that, to feel himself at the mercy of the
miserable vermin of the slime.

However, he crushed the crab under his heel, and, ceasing to multiply
his enemies by killing them, contented himself with defense, while he
thought what could possibly be done.

"No doubt those first hundred heads must all have come from some one
head," thought he. "They could not grow like that without a root; so
that if I could only destroy the root they would cease to grow. This
is my mistake: I am fighting only with what I see, instead of going to
the root of things, and attacking the evil there."

So he called out to Iolas to heat a piece of iron red-hot; and when
this was ready, to stand by, and to scorch with it the place of every
head which the club shattered. The plan answered wonderfully. Hercules
crushed head after head; Iolas applied the red-hot iron; and so root
after root was burned up and perished. And at last they came to the
root of all the heads; and when this was reached and burned, the
monster sputtered and died, just when Hercules felt that he, strong as
he was, could scarce have struck another blow.

Hercules cut open the Hydra, and dipped his arrows in its gall, so
that they should give deadly wounds. Wearily he returned to Mycenæ,
hoping for a little rest. But Eurystheus had hidden himself in his
brazen pot again, whence he cried out:--

"Be off at once; and catch the stag of Œnoe alive!"


PART IV.--HIS THIRD LABOR: THE STAG.

The stag of Œnoe was sacred to Diana; and no wonder, for besides
being so swift that no horse or hound could follow it, it had brazen
feet and horns of pure gold. Of course this labor was not so dangerous
as the others, but apparently more utterly impossible.

Impossible as it was, however, Hercules had to try. Had he been
ordered to bring the stag to Mycenæ dead, he might perhaps hope to
catch it with an arrow; but his orders were to bring it alive. So,
having started it from its lair, he followed it with his utmost speed
and skill. At first he tried to run it down; but the stag was not only
the swifter, but had as much endurance as he. Then he tried to drive
it to bay, but it always managed to escape out of the seemingly most
hopeless corners. He tried to catch it asleep; but his slightest and
most distant movement startled it, and off it raced again. All the
arts of the deer-stalker he put in practice, but all in vain. And thus
he hunted the stag of Œnoe, scarce resting day and night for a
whole year. It looked as if he were to spend the rest of his life in
pursuing what was not to be caught by mortal man; and the worst of it
was that, while there was real use in destroying wild beasts and
monsters, like the lion and the Hydra, his present labor, even if it
succeeded, would be of no use at all.

Still it had to be attempted; and I suppose you have guessed that he
succeeded, and that it was in some wonderful way. Well--he did succeed
at last, but it was not in a wonderful way at all. It was just by not
giving in. One of the two had to give in, and it was not Hercules. One
day he managed to drive the stag into a trap and to seize it by the
horns.

As he was returning to Mycenæ, dragging the stag, he met a tall and
beautiful woman, dressed for the chase, and carrying a bow and quiver.
As soon as her eyes fell upon the struggling stag she frowned
terribly.

"What mortal are you," she asked, "who have dared to lay hands on my
own stag, the stag sacred to me, who am Diana? Loose it, and let it
go."

Hercules sighed. "I would do so gladly, great goddess," he answered;
"but it is not in my power."

"Not in your power to open your hand?" she asked, in angry surprise.
"We will soon see that," and she seized her stag by the other horn to
pull it away.

"It goes against me," said Hercules, "to oppose a goddess; but I have
got to bring this stag to Mycenæ, and neither gods nor men shall
prevent me, so long as I am alive."

"I am Diana," she said again, "and I command you to let the stag go."

"And I," said he, "am only Hercules, the servant of Eurystheus, and
therefore I cannot let it go."

"Then I wish," said Diana, "that any of the gods had so faithful a
servant as Eurystheus has! So you are Hercules?" she said, her frown
changing to a smile. "Then I give you the stag, for the sake of the
oracle of my brother Apollo. I am only a goddess; you are a man who
has conquered himself, and whom therefore even the gods must obey."

So saying, she vanished. And the stag no longer struggled for freedom,
but followed Hercules to Mycenæ as gently and lovingly as a tame fawn.


PART V.--HIS FOURTH LABOR: THE BOAR.

The chase of the stag with the golden horns had taken so long that
Eurystheus was beginning to give Hercules up for lost: and he was not
sorry, for he was becoming more and more afraid of the man who only
lived to do his bidding. He could not but think that his cousin must
be playing some deep and underhand game. So when Hercules came back,
with the stag following tamely at heel, he hid himself again, and by
way of welcome bade Hercules capture and bring him, alive, a very
different sort of wild beast--not a harmless stag, but the great and
fierce wild boar which had its den in the mountains of Erymanthus, and
ravaged the country round.

Hercules was getting weary of these labors, to which he saw no end.
Not for a moment did he think of disobeying, but he set out with a
heavy heart, and with some rising bitterness against his taskmaster.
His way to the mountains of Erymanthus lay through the country of the
Centaurs, and of his old teacher, Chiron.

Here he halted at the dwelling of one of the Centaurs, Pholus, who
received him kindly. But Hercules was feeling fairly worn out in
spirit, and Pholus failed to cheer him.

"What is the use of it all?" he complained. "No doubt the gods are
just, and ought to be obeyed; but they are not kind. Why did they send
me into the world, and give me strength, only to go about after wild
beasts at the bidding of a coward? Why did they give me passions, only
to have the trouble of keeping them down? If I had been like other
men--as weak and as cold-blooded as they are--I should have been
happy, and perhaps done some real good, and at any rate lived my own
life in my own way. It isn't as if I cared for glory, but I do want a
little peace and pleasure. Come, Pholus, let me have some wine: I want
it, and let it be in plenty!"

"I am very sorry," said Pholus. "I have no wine."

"Why, what is that, then?" asked Hercules, pointing to a big barrel in
the corner.

"That is wine," said Pholus; "but I can't give you any of it, because
it is not my own. It belongs to all the Centaurs; and, as it is public
property, nobody may take any of it without the leave of the whole
tribe."

"Nonsense!" said Hercules. "Wine I want, and wine I'll have."

So saying, he stove in the head of the cask with a single blow of his
fist, and, dipping and filling a goblet, began to drink eagerly.

The wine soon began to warm his blood and raise his heart. After the
first cup or two, the cloud which had been falling over him rolled
away, and life again seemed worth living for its own sake, and not
only for duty's. But he did not stop at two cups, nor at three; nor
even when it began to mount into his brain, and to bring back those
wild instincts which he thought he had left behind him in the Temple
of Apollo.

Meanwhile the news had spread among the Centaurs that Hercules was
among them, and making free with the public wine. The odor of the
broken cask brought a crowd of them at full gallop, and disturbed
Hercules in the midst of his carouse.

"Do you call this hospitality, you savages?" he shouted, stumbling out
of the house, and laying about him with his club freely among the
crowd, while Pholus vainly tried to prevent mischief. Down went
Centaur after Centaur, till those who were uninjured galloped away
panic-stricken, Pholus himself being among the slain.

"To Chiron!" cried the Centaurs; "he will know how to deal with this
madman."

They rode as hard as they could to Chiron's dwelling, Hercules,
furious with wine and anger, still pursuing. As they were outstripping
him, he let fly his arrows among them; and, as evil luck would have
it, at that very moment Chiron rode out from his gate to see what was
happening, and to quiet the disorder, and one of the arrows struck him
in the knee, and he fell.

Hercules became sober enough when he came up and found his old friend
and teacher writhing in terrible agony; for the arrow was one which he
had dipped in the deadly poison of the Hydra. He could only look on
with remorse. Chiron knew him, and, when the agony passed away into
death, gave him a look of forgiveness. What the wise Centaur's last
word to his favorite pupil was, I know not; but I think it must have
been something like: "Let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest
he fall."

       *       *       *       *       *

I will not try to think of what Hercules felt when he watched the
burial of the friends whom he had slain in a fit of drunken passion,
for no cause. However, his duty lay still before him, and it had
become more clear. Never again would he complain of his fate, or
question the justice of the gods, or think of the life which had been
lent to him as if it were his own.

In due time, after a long and dangerous journey among the mountains,
he came upon the den of the great wild boar which he was to capture
alive. There was nothing to be done but to follow it as he had
followed the stag, watching for a chance of trapping it unawares: and
in the pursuit another whole year passed away. Then, in the middle of
winter, there fell such a snow that the boar was unable to leave its
den. Hercules forced his way through the snowed-up entrance, and tried
to seize the brute as he had seized the Nemean lion. The boar,
however, rushed past him, and would have escaped again had not the
snow hindered his running, and at last exhausted him. Hercules, though
nearly exhausted himself, chose the right moment for closing with him,
and, after a long struggle, bound him with a halter in such a manner
that, in spite of its efforts, he could drag it by main strength down
the mountain.

       *       *       *       *       *

Once more Eurystheus had given Hercules up for lost: and the snow
prevented him from hearing any news beforehand. So when, while he was
standing at the city gate, there suddenly appeared before him, not
only Hercules--all grim and rough from his year's hunting--but the
largest and most savage wild boar in the world, looking ready to
devour him, he was so terrified that he whisked like a frightened
mouse into his pot, and did not dare come out again for seven days.

As for Chiron the Centaur, he became a constellation in heaven, where
he is still to be seen. He was the teacher of nearly all the heroes
and demi-gods: and after his death there seems to have been an end of
them. There have been plenty of brave men since; but not like Castor
and Pollux, Perseus, Theseus, and Hercules. Nor, since that fatal day,
does one hear of the Centaurs any more. Thus did one passing fit of
causeless anger, instantly repented of, destroy these wisest and most
valiant creatures, and deprive the whole world of more than it has
ever regained during thousands of years.

Hercules solemnly sacrificed the boar, and then took a little rest,
meditating on all that had befallen. But his rest was not to be for
long. For there was Eurystheus in his pot, trying to think of
something that should keep him occupied forever.

And--"I have it!" he exclaimed at last, summoning Hercules by a stroke
on his pot's brazen side.


PART VI.--HIS FIFTH LABOR: THE AUGEAN STABLE.

The next labor which Eurystheus laid upon Hercules was to clean out a
stable.

That does not sound very much after the others. But then the stable
was that of Augeas, King of Elis, which was at once the largest and
the dirtiest in the whole world.

Augeas had a prodigious number of oxen and goats, and the stable in
which they were all kept had never been cleaned. The result was a
mountain of filth and litter, which not even Hercules could clear away
in a lifetime--not, of course, from want of strength, but from want of
time. Hercules beheld with disgust and dismay the loathsome and
degrading toil in which he was to spend the rest of his days. The
other labors had at least been honorable, and befitting a prince: this
would have appalled a scavenger.

"It is very good of such a hero as you," said Augeas, "to undertake to
clean my stable. It really does want cleaning, as you see: and it was
very kind of Eurystheus to think of it. You shall not find me
ungrateful. I will give you one ox and one goat in every ten--when
the job is done."

He could very safely promise this, because he knew that the job could
never be done.

"I am not serving for hire," said Hercules. "Nevertheless it is only
right that you should not let your stable get into such a state as
this, and then get it put right for nothing. You want a lesson: and
you shall have it, too."

Seeing that mere strength would be wasted in such toil, Hercules went
to work with his brain as well. Through the land of Elis ran the river
Alpheus, that same Alpheus which had told Ceres what had become of
Proserpine. Hercules carefully studied the country; and having laid
his plans, dug a channel from near the source of the river to one of
the entrances of the stable. Then, damming up the old channel, he let
the stream run into the new. The new course was purposely made narrow,
so that the current might be exceedingly strong. When all was ready,
he opened the sluice at one entrance of the stable, so that the water
poured in a flood through the whole building, and out at a gate on the
other side. And it had all been so managed that when the river had
poured through, and was shut off again, all the filth and litter had
been carried away by the Alpheus underground, and the stable had been
washed clean, without a scrap of refuse to be found anywhere. For the
Alpheus, you must know, did not run into the sea, like other rivers.
It disappeared down a deep chasm, then ran through a natural tunnel
under the sea, and rose again, far away, in the island of Sicily,
where it had brought to Ceres the news from underground. Thus
everything thrown into it in Elis came up again in Sicily--and the
Sicilians must have been considerably astonished at that extraordinary
eruption of stable litter. Perhaps it is that which, acting as manure,
has helped to make Sicily so fertile.

Hercules made a point of claiming his price. But Augeas said:--

"Nonsense! A bargain is a bargain. You undertook to clean my stable:
and you have done nothing of the kind. No work, no pay."

"What can you mean?" asked Hercules. "Surely I have cleaned your
stable--you will not find in it a broken straw."

"No," said Augeas. "It was the Alpheus did that: not you."

"But it was I who used the Alpheus--"

"Yes; no doubt. But the impudence of expecting me to pay a tenth of
all my flocks and herds for an idea so simple that I should have
thought of it myself, if you hadn't, just by chance, happened to think
of it before me! You have not earned your wages. You cleaned the
stable by an unfair trick: and it was the river cleaned it--not you."

"Very well," said Hercules, grimly. "If you had paid me honestly, I
would have given you your goats and your oxen back again; for, as I
told you, I do not serve for reward. But now I perceive that I have
_not_ quite cleaned your stable. There is still one piece of dirt left
in it--and that is a cheating knave, Augeas by name. So, as I cannot
go back to Mycenæ till my work is done--"

He was about to throw Augeas into the river, to follow the rest of the
litter: and about what afterwards happened, different people tell
different things. I very strongly agree, however, with those who tell
that Hercules spared the life of Augeas after having given him a
lesson: for certainly he was not worth the killing. And I am the more
sure of this because, after his death, Augeas was honored as
hero--which surely would not have happened if he had not learned to
keep both his stables and his promises clean before he died.


PART VII.--MORE LABORS: AND THE CATTLE OF GERYON.

Eurystheus was getting to his wits' end for work which should keep his
cousin employed. He sent him to kill the man-eating birds of Lake
Stymphalus; to catch, and bring to Mycenæ alive, a wild bull which was
devastating Crete; to obtain for Eurystheus the famous mares which fed
on human flesh, and belonged to the Thracian King Diomedes, who used
to throw men and women alive into their manger. In three years' time
Hercules destroyed all the birds, and brought to Mycenæ both the bull
and the mares, to whom he had given the body of their master.

These were the sixth, seventh, and eighth labors, which had taken
eight years. The ninth was of a different kind. There lived in the
country of Cappadocia, which is in Asia, a nation of women, without
any men among them. They were called the Amazons, and were famous for
their skill in hunting, and for their fierceness and courage in war,
conquering the neighboring nations far and wide. Their queen at this
time was Hippolyta; and Eurystheus bade Hercules bring him Queen
Hippolyta's girdle. Perhaps he thought that a strong man would be
ashamed to put out his strength against a woman. If so, however, he
reckoned wrongly. Hercules had to do his work, whether man or woman
stood in the way; and he won the queen's girdle in fair fight, without
harming the queen.

"I must send Hercules to the very end of the earth," thought poor
Eurystheus, who grew more and more frightened by every new success of
his cousin. So he inquired diligently of every traveler who came to
Mycenæ, and in time had the good luck to hear of a suitable monster
named Geryon, who lived in a cave at Gades, now called Cadiz, on the
coast of Spain, very near indeed to what the Greeks then thought to be
the end of the world. Geryon, so the travelers reported, had three
bodies and three heads, and kept large and valuable flocks and herds.
"That will be just the thing for Hercules!" thought Eurystheus. So he
called from his brazen pot--

"Go to Gades, and get me the cattle and the sheep of Geryon."

So Hercules set off for Spain by way of Egypt and that great Libyan
desert through which Perseus had passed on his adventure against the
Gorgons. It was an unfortunate way to take, for there reigned over
Egypt at that time King Busiris, who had made a law that every
foreigner entering the country should be sacrificed to Jupiter.
Hercules, knowing nothing of this law, was taken by surprise as soon
as he landed, overpowered by numbers, bound in iron chains, and laid
upon the altar to be slain. But scarcely had the sacrificing priest
raised his knife when Hercules burst the chains, and, being no longer
taken at disadvantage, made a sacrifice of Busiris and his ministers,
thus freeing the land of Egypt from a foolish and cruel law.

Thence he passed into the great desert, and traveled on until one day
he reached a pile of human skulls, nearly as big as a mountain. While
wondering at the sight, a shadow fell over him, and a big voice said--

"Yes, you may well look at that! I have nearly enough now."

It was a giant, nearly as high as the heap of skulls. "And who are
you?" asked Hercules; "and what are these?"

"I am Antæus," answered the giant; "and the Sea is my father and the
Earth is my mother. I am collecting skulls in order to build a temple
with them upon my mother the Earth to my father the Sea."

"And how," asked Hercules, "have you managed to get so many?"

"By killing everybody I see, and adding his skull to the heap--as I am
going to add yours."

So saying, he seized Hercules to make an end of him. And amazed enough
the giant was when he himself was dashed to the ground with force
enough to break any ordinary bones.

Antæus, however, though astonished, was not in the least hurt; so that
it was the turn of Hercules to be surprised. Again they closed, and
again Hercules threw him, with still greater strength; and they closed
again.

And again and again Hercules threw him, but every time with greater
difficulty. The more he was thrown, the stronger the giant became; he
rose from every fall fresher than before. Plainly, if this went on,
Antæus would be beaten until he became stronger than Hercules, and
would end by winning.

It seemed very strange that the more a man was dashed to the ground
the fresher and stronger he should grow. But--

"I see!" thought Hercules to himself. "This giant is the son of the
Earth; so whenever he falls, it is upon the bosom of his own mother,
who strengthens and refreshes her son. So I must take another way."

So thinking, he put out all his strength, and again lifted Antæus in
his arms. But this time he did not dash him to the Earth; he held him
in the air, and crushed him to death between his hands.

After this he traveled on, without further adventure, until he reached
the far western end of the Mediterranean Sea, which was thought to be
the end of the world. If you happen to look at a map you will easily
find the exact place--it is where the south of Spain very nearly
touches Africa. When Hercules arrived there, Spain quite touched
Africa, so that one might walk from one into the other. It is said
that Hercules himself opened out the narrow passage which lets the
Mediterranean Sea out into the great ocean, so that ships could
afterwards sail to Britain and all over the world. That passage is now
called the Strait of Gibraltar. But the rock of Gibraltar in Spain,
and the opposite rock in Africa, between which the Strait flows, are
still often called the "Pillars of Hercules."

To get from there to Gades was no great distance; and to kill the
monstrous ogre Geryon and to seize his flocks and herds for Eurystheus
was no great feat after what he had already done. But to drive such a
number of sheep and cattle all the way from Gades in Spain to Mycenæ
in Greece was not an easy matter. There was only one way of doing so
without being stopped somewhere by the sea, and this, as a map will
show at once, is by crossing those two great mountain-ranges, the
Pyrenees and the Alps--and for one man to drive thousands of sheep and
thousands of horned cattle over such mountains as those was the most
tiresome and troublesome labor that Hercules had ever undergone.

He got as far as Italy without the loss of a single sheep or cow, and
was thinking that he saw the end of his trouble. One morning, however,
having counted the cattle as usual, and having gone some miles upon
his day's journey, he became aware that there was something wrong. The
sheep began to bleat and the cattle to bellow in an odd and excited
way. And frequently, from behind him, he heard an answering sound
which at first he took for an echo. But no, it could not be that, for
an echo would have repeated the bleating as well as the bellowing, and
what he heard behind him was the sound of bellowing only--precisely
like that of Geryon's cows. He counted the herd over again, and,
though he was convinced that it was all right at starting, he found a
full dozen missing.

Now a dozen was not much to lose out of thousands. But he had been
ordered to bring back the whole herd, and he would have felt that he
would not have done his duty if he, by any neglect or laziness of his
own, lost even one lamb by the way. So, following the distant sound,
he, with infinite labor, drove his cattle back across the hills,
league after league, till he reached a huge black cavern, the mouth of
which was strewn and heaped with human bones. His cattle became more
excited and more restive, for the sound he was following evidently
came from within the cave.

He was about to enter and search when a three-headed ogre issued,
whose three mouths, when he opened them to speak, breathed smoke and
flames.

"This is my cave," said he, with all three mouths at once; "and no
man shall enter it but I."

"I only want my cattle," said Hercules. "Bring them out to me."

"Cattle?" asked the ogre. "There are no cattle here. I swear it by the
head of my mother."

"And who was she," asked Hercules, "that her head is an oath to swear
by?"

"I am Cacus, the son of the Gorgon Medusa," answered the ogre, "and I
swear----"

But before he could finish his oath, there came such a bellowing from
within the cave that the very cattle seemed as if they could not
endure such falsehood, and were proclaiming that Cacus lied.

"I am sorry," said Hercules. "I am weary of traveling, and of
monsters, and of giants, and of ogres, and of liars, and of thieves. I
really do not want to kill any more. You are not one of my labors, and
I have had enough trouble. Still, if you had as many heads as the
Hydra and as many arms as Briareus, I should have to fight you rather
than lose one of the cattle I was bidden to bring."

Cacus laughed. "Do you see those bones?" he asked. "They are all that
is left of people who have looked for what they have lost in my cave."

"Then," said Hercules, "either you shall add mine to the heap, or I
will add yours."

And presently the bones of Cacus the Robber were added to the heap,
and Hercules, having got his cattle back, at last reached Mycenæ.

       *       *       *       *       *

Eurystheus almost forgot to be frightened in his joy at becoming the
owner of such flocks and herds. He listened with interest to the story
of his cousin's travels, and, having heard it to an end, said--

"So you crossed the great Libyan desert until you reached the ocean
which surrounds the world? Why, then, you must have found the way to
the gardens of the Hesperides--the gardens of golden fruit which the
great sleepless dragon guards, and which our forefather Perseus saw
when he turned Atlas into stone. Did you also see those gardens?"

"No," said Hercules.

"Then," said Eurystheus, "go and see them at once. Go and bring me
some of the Golden Apples--as many as you can."


PART VIII.--HIS ELEVENTH LABOR: THE GARDEN OF THE HESPERIDES.

So Hercules, without being allowed any time for rest, had to go back
the whole way he had come, without any certain knowledge of where the
golden-fruited gardens of the Hesperides were to be found, except that
it was somewhere in Africa. Somebody must know, however, or else the
gardens would never have been heard of, for travelers never told
anything but the truth in those days. He therefore diligently asked
everybody he met where the gardens were to be found, and, among
others, some nymphs whom he met on the banks of the river Po, while he
was passing through Italy.

"We cannot tell you," said they; "but we know who can--old Nereus, the
sea-god, if you can only get him to tell."

"And why should he not tell?" asked Hercules.

"Because he never will tell anybody anything, unless he is obliged."

"And how is he to be obliged?" asked Hercules again.

"He is bound to answer anybody who is stronger than he."

"Well, I am pretty strong," said Hercules, modestly. "Anyhow, I can
but try."

"Yes, you do look strong," said the nymphs; "but----" Here they broke
into a laugh, as if some sort of a joke were in their minds. "Well, if
you go to the Ægean Sea, where King Ægeus was drowned, you'll be sure
to find Nereus sleeping in the sun somewhere along the shore."

"And how shall I know him when I see him?" asked Hercules.

"You will see a very, very old man, older than anybody you ever saw,
with bright blue hair, and a very long white beard. He has fifty
daughters, so he often gets tired, and likes to sleep as much as he
can."

Hercules thanked the nymphs, whom he still heard laughing after he
left them, and thought to himself that it would not be much trouble to
prove himself stronger than a very old man who was always tired. So,
having journeyed back again to the Ægean Sea, he walked along the
shore till, sure enough, he saw, sound asleep in a sunny cove, a man
who looked a thousand years old, with a white beard reaching below his
waist, and with hair as blue as the sea.

"Will you kindly tell me the way to the gardens of the Hesperides?"
asked Hercules, waking Nereus by a gentle shake--though I suspect one
of Hercules' shakes was not what most people would consider gentle.

Instead of answering, Nereus tried to roll himself into the sea, at
the bottom of which was his home. Hercules caught him by the leg and
arm: when, to his amazement, Nereus suddenly turned into a vigorous
young man, who wrestled with him stoutly to get away.

Hercules got him down at last. "Now tell me the way to the gardens of
the Hesperides!" he panted--for he was out of breath with the
struggle. But he found himself holding down, no longer a man, but a
huge and slippery seal, which all but succeeded in plunging into the
sea.

But he held on until the seal also was exhausted. And then Hercules
found out what had made the nymphs laugh so. For when the seal was
wearied out it changed into a gigantic crab, the crab into a
crocodile, the crocodile into a mermaid, the mermaid into a
sea-serpent, the sea-serpent into an albatross, the albatross into an
octopus, the octopus into a mass of sea-weed, which was the hardest to
hold of all. But the sea-weed turned back into the old man again, who
said:--

"There--you have conquered me in all my shapes; I haven't got any
more. You may let me go now, and I will answer you. You must go on
through Italy and Spain, and thence across into Africa. You will then
be in the land of Mauritania. You must still go south, following the
sea-shore, till you come to the giant Atlas, who supports the sky upon
his head, and so keeps it from falling. He"--the old sea-god's voice
was growing fainter and fainter--"he will tell you all about the
gardens of the Hesperides. They're close by--the gardens of the
Hesp----"

And so, having finished his answer, Nereus turned over and went
comfortably to sleep again.

       *       *       *       *       *

Once more Hercules set out upon the journey which had seemed as if it
would never even begin. Once more he traveled through Italy and Spain,
and crossed into Africa over the strait which he himself had made. And
on and on he went, always southward by the sea, till, full six hundred
miles from the Pillars of Hercules, he saw what he knew must be the
giant Atlas on whose head rested the sky. There Atlas, King of
Mauritania, had stood ever since he had looked upon the head of
Medusa. And if you wonder how the sky was held up before that time,
you must ask Nereus, if you can catch him--not me.

As you may suppose, the poor giant was terribly weary of having to
hold up, night and day, year after year, the whole weight of the sun,
moon, and stars. Even his strength is not able to keep stars from
falling now and then--sometimes on a clear night you may see them
tumbling down by scores, so it is terrible to think of what would
happen if he took even a moment's rest. The whole sky would come
crashing down, and the universe would be in ruins. He was longing for
the rest he dared not take, and so, when Hercules, said to him, "I am
seeking fruit from the gardens of the Hesperides," a crafty idea came
into the giant's mind.

"Ah!" said he, with a nod which shook down a whole shower of stars.
"There is no difficulty. All you have to do is walk through the sea
towards the setting sun, till you get there. And there's nothing to
prevent you from getting the golden fruit but the dragon who guards
the tree on which it grows. The sea doesn't come up higher than my
waist, even in the deepest part; and, if you can get past the dragon,
my three daughters, the Hesperides, will no doubt receive you with the
greatest surprise."

For the first time, Hercules felt dismayed. He had no boat, nor the
means of building one; he could not swim further than his eyes could
see. As for wading through an ocean that would come up to the waist of
a giant as high as the skies, that was absurd. And as to the dragon,
he remembered that Perseus had only passed it by means of a helmet
which made its wearer invisible.

Atlas saw his perplexity.

"Ah, I forgot you were such a little fellow," said the giant. "I'll go
and get you some of the fruit myself. It isn't many of my steps from
here to the garden, and the dragon knows me--and if he didn't, I could
step over him. And he couldn't hurt me, seeing that I've been turned
to stone. But wait, though--what on earth's to become of the sky while
I'm gone?"

"I'm pretty strong," said Hercules. "If I climb up to the peak of the
next mountain to you, I daresay I could hold the sky up while you're
away."

Atlas smiled to himself, for this was just what he had intended.

"Come up, then," said he. So Hercules clambered to the highest peak he
could find, and Atlas, slowly bending, gradually and carefully let
down the sky upon the head and shoulders of the hero. Then, heaving a
deep roar of relief, he strode into the sea.

It was surely the strangest plight in which a mortal ever found
himself--standing on a mountain-peak, and, by the strength of his own
shoulders, keeping the skies from falling. He was answerable for the
safety of the whole world: the burden of the entire universe was laid
upon the shoulders of one man. They were strong enough to bear it; but
it seemed like an eternity before Atlas returned. A hundred times a
minute Hercules felt as if he must let all go, whatever happened;
indeed he was actually tempted to yield, for he was weary of these
endless labors; and it was only for mankind's sake, and not for his
own, that he held on through the agony of the crushing weight of the
whole universe.

But Atlas came at last, with three golden apples in his hand.

"Here they are!" he roared. "And now, good-bye!"

"What!" exclaimed Hercules. "Are you not coming back to your duty?"

"Am I a fool?" asked the giant. "Not I. Keep the honor of holding up
the skies yourself, since you are so strong and willing. Never again
for me!"

"At least, then," said Hercules, "let me place my lion's skin between
my shoulders and the sky, so that the weight may be less painful to
bear."

Atlas could take no objection to that, so he put his own shoulders
under the dome of heaven to let Hercules make himself as comfortable
as the situation allowed. Hercules seized the chance, and let the
whole weight of the sky fall upon the shoulders of Atlas once more.
And there it still rests; and thus Atlas failed in trying to shift his
own proper burden to another's shoulders.

"Only _three_ apples!" exclaimed Eurystheus, when Hercules returned.
"You can't have taken much trouble, to get so little. Go to Hades, and
bring me Cerberus, the three-headed dog of Pluto!... He will never do
that?" he thought to himself. "To reach Hades, one must die!"


PART IX.--HIS TWELFTH LABOR: THE DESCENT INTO HADES.

I daresay you have forgotten--for it is a long way back--the name of
Admetus, that King of Pheræ in Thessaly, whom Apollo, when banished
from heaven, served as a shepherd for nine years. Admetus did not know
that it was a god whom he had to keep his sheep; but he was so good
and kind a master that Apollo, revealing himself at the end of his
exile, bade him name any boon he desired, and it should be granted.

There is no such difficult question in the world to answer as that.
Admetus answered, "Grant that I may never die."

But that is the one thing which not even the gods can grant to mortal
men. The very cause of Apollo's having been banished to earth was his
killing the Cyclops for forging the thunderbolt with which Jupiter had
killed Æsculapius for making dead men live again. Not even the Fates
could change that law even for the sake of Apollo. But they said,
"Admetus shall live so long as he can find somebody else to die
instead of him whenever his death-time comes," which was all they
could allow.

After the return of Apollo to heaven, Admetus lived on in great
happiness and welfare. He was one of the Argonauts; and he took part
in the hunting of the Calydonian boar. He had fallen in love with
Alcestis, the beautiful daughter of that King Pelias of whom you read
in the story of the Golden Fleece, whose hand had been promised to the
man who should come for her in a chariot drawn by a wild boar and a
lion. This Admetus did; and in this chariot he drove her back to his
own kingdom of Pheræ, where he made her his queen. And there they
lived in great love and happiness for many years.

But the day came at last which had been appointed to Admetus for his
death-time. Then Admetus, remembering the promise of the Fates, and
not able to bear losing the happiness of living, thus besought his old
father, Pheres--

"Father, you are already old and near to death; you have lived your
life; it matters nothing to you whether your old age lasts a year less
or a year more. What you now call life is only weariness and pain. But
I am still young and strong, with the best part of my life still
unlived, and my children ungrown, and my kingdom to govern: I beseech
you to die for me, so that I also may live to be as old and as wise as
you."

But his father answered: "No, my son; life is precious, even when one
is old. The nearer we approach the cold dark grave, the dearer grow
the sunshine and the living air. I will do anything else for you, but
not die."

Then Admetus besought Clymene, his mother--

"Mother, you are old and weak, and a woman; I am young and strong, and
a man. What is such life as yours compared with mine? I beseech you to
die for me: let not a mother doom to death her own child."

But his mother answered: "No, my son; he who loves his life as you
love it, and fears death as you fear it, is not one for whom even his
mother ought to die."

Then Admetus besought all his friends and kinsmen; but all were deaf
to him. For well the Fates had known that their promise would be in
vain. But at last his dear and beautiful wife Alcestis came to him,
and said--

"I will die for you, and gladly!" Ah, those Fates do not know
everything after all!

Admetus, with all his selfishness, had never thought sacrificing his
wife; and he was overcome with horror. He prayed that Apollo's gift
might be taken back; but the Fates are not to be played fast and loose
with in that way, and they were angry perhaps at finding themselves
baffled by a mere loving woman. Alcestis had to die instead of
Admetus; and so she died, as she had said, proudly and gladly.

Now that it was too late, her husband was broken-hearted at having
caused his wife's death for the sake of what had been but a selfish
whim. All he could do for her in return was honor her love and
devotion by a splendid funeral, to which people came from far and near
to cover her grave with flowers.

Alcestis was buried, and the farewell hymn was being sung, when there
thrust his way, rather roughly, through the crowded temple a stranger
of mighty build, carrying a club, and clad with a lion's skin,
seemingly the worse for wine. Admetus was too absorbed in his grief to
notice this rude intrusion; but some of the bystanders cried shame on
the stranger, and one of the priests came in his way, and said
sternly--

"Who are you that dare to trouble grief like ours?"

"Who am I? Why, the servant of Eurystheus, King of Argos and Mycenæ.
Is this how you receive strangers in your land? I had heard that
Admetus of Pheræ is the most generous of kings, and Alcestis the most
gracious of queens; and here I find you all like ghosts at a funeral.
Where is the king?"

"There stands the king," said the priest, solemnly. And then he told
the stranger the story which many a poet has told since--the story of
how strong true love is, and how foolish it is to measure life by the
number of its years.

Hercules--for he the stranger was--was sobered in a moment. "It is a
shame!" he exclaimed, bringing down his club on the floor. "Fates or
no fates, it shall not be! I am bound to Hades on an errand for my own
king, and I will not come back unless I do a better one for yours."

So, leaving them all offended at what they took for a drunken boast,
he dropped into the open grave: the people only thinking that he had
passed from the temple somewhat suddenly. Hence he followed the
passage taken by the queen's soul till he reached the Styx; and hard
work must poor old Charon have had to row across such a weight as
Hercules instead of the ghosts to which he was accustomed. On he went,
finding his way as best he could without a guide, until, chancing upon
the black gate of Tartarus, there growled in the middle of his path
the three-headed dog Cerberus, with flashing eyes and flaming jaws.

Orpheus, you remember, had quieted Cerberus with the music of his
lute: Hercules, going to work in other fashion, brought down his club
upon one of the dog's skulls in a way that bewildered the other two.
Then, seizing the monster by the throat, and in spite of its furious
struggles, he fairly dragged it along with him by sheer strength, even
into the very presence of Pluto and Proserpine.

"And," he cried, "god and goddess though you are, I will brain this
dog of yours upon the steps of your throne unless you surrender to me
the soul of Alcestis, that I may deliver her from death, and lead her
back into life again."

It was an unheard-of thing that a man should thus take Hades by storm,
and dictate terms to its king and queen. But for that moment I verily
believe that Hercules became more than man--nay, more than Alcestis,
because, while she had betaken herself to Elysium for the love of one
who was dear to her, he had dared the torments of Tartarus out of pity
for strangers and hate of wrong. Nay, I think it was truly this which
had made his grip so fast on the dog's throat, and his club so heavy
on the dog's three skulls; and this that made a mortal stand as their
master before even Pluto and Proserpine.

"In the name of all the gods," said Pluto, "take the woman, and
begone."

Then Alcestis appeared--a mere gray shade, the touch of whose hand was
but like a film of gossamer. But as he dragged the less and less
struggling Cerberus with one hand, and led her with the other, her
shade took color and formed, and her fingers tightened upon his, until
the living Alcestis, more beautiful than before, stepped with him out
of her still open grave, and threw herself into her husband's arms.

Hercules did not wait for thanks; indeed, with Cerberus still on his
hands, his only thought was to hurry back to Mycenæ. It is the
strangest picture one can think of--a man dragging along the
three-headed dog of Hades in the open light of day. It was one long
strain on his whole strength, all day and all night long, for many
nights and days. But he reached Mycenæ at last--and into his brazen
pot leaped Eurystheus in the twinkling of an eye.

"I have brought him," said Hercules. "Cerberus is yours."

"Then," cried Eurystheus, as well as his terror would let him, "be off
with you, Cerberus and all. Never more be servant of mine; never let
me see your face or hear of you again!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Thus Hercules, by obedient service, won his freedom, and his great
penance was fulfilled. And the first use he made of freedom was to
give it to Cerberus, who straightway, with a terrible howl, plunged
into the earth, and disappeared.


PART X.--THE CHOICE OF HERCULES.

Yes; at last Hercules was free, after twelve long years of slavery,
during which he had scarce known a day's pleasure or ease. It seemed
too good to be true.

His only trouble now was what to do with his liberty. He was his own
master; the whole world was before him, and he was strong enough to do
whatever he pleased. And while thus thinking what he should do with
his life and strength, there came to him in the middle of the night a
vision as of two women, real and yet unreal, bringing with them a
strange light of their own.

The first to speak was young and beautiful, crowned with flowers, and
with a voice as sweet as her smile.

"What folly is thinking!" said she. "You have toiled enough; you have
won the right to do whatever you like best for the rest of your days.
No more labor to serve another's will or whim; no more hateful tasks,
one ending only for another to begin; no more cold, hunger, thirst,
strife with monsters, and self-denial; and all for what? Why, for
nothing. My name is Pleasure. Choose me for your soul, and you shall
have Power, Glory, Riches, Comfort, Delight--all your whole heart's
desire."

The other shape wore no flowers: her lips did not smile, and the light
of her clear bright eyes was cold; and her voice belonged to her eyes.

"Yet think," said she, "before you choose, because you must choose
to-night once for all. Was it Pleasure who helped you to rid the
people of the ravage of the Nemæan lion? No, indeed: she would have
bidden you stay at home. Was it Pleasure who stood by you as you
struck off the heads of the Hydra, one by one? No, indeed. Did
Pleasure join with you in chasing the Erymanthine boar and the stag
with the golden horns? Did she clean away the Augean stable? Did she
send you forth to free the world of the man-eating birds of Lake
Stymphalus, and the dreadful Cretan bull, and the mares of King
Diomedes, and the Giant Antæus, and the Ogre Geryon, and Cacus the
Robber? Did Pleasure save Alcestis from death, and break through the
very gates of hell? No; it was Obedience. And if obedience to a mere
earthly master has worked such wonders for the good of all mankind,
how much more good will come of willing obedience to Me?"

"And how, then, are you called?" asked Hercules, looking from one to
the other--from the warm glowing smile of Pleasure to the grave eyes
of the form which had last spoken.

"Among men I am called Duty," said she.

Hercules could not help sighing--for the more he looked at Pleasure
the more beautiful she grew; while the face of Duty seemed every
moment to become more stern and cold.

"It does seem hard," said he, "to use my freedom in only making a
change of service. But after all, what is the good of having more
strength than other men, except to help them? It's true, though I
never thought of it before. And if Pleasure won't help me to rid the
world of the rest of its monsters, and Duty will, why, there's only
one thing for a man to do, and that's to choose Duty, and obey her,
however hard she may be."

Then he went to sleep with his mind made up, and when he woke in the
morning his choice woke with him.

       *       *       *       *       *

So Hercules, instead of being the servant of Eurystheus, became, of
his own free will, the servant of all mankind. He made it his work to
seek out wrong, and never to rest until he had set it right: he
traveled about the world, carrying everywhere with him the love of law
and justice, and the worship of the gods, even into savage lands where
such things had never been known. Ogres and monsters disappeared: it
seemed as if his strength were bringing back the Golden Age.

One day his wanderings brought him into the heart of the great
mountain-range called Caucasus, a vast and dreadful region of
snow-covered peaks which no human foot had ever climbed. Never had
even he known a harder labor than to make his way among these icy
precipices, where every step meant danger. Not a sign of life was to
be seen or heard, when suddenly he heard a terrible cry like that of a
giant in pain.

He looked round; but saw nothing but the silent mountains. Then the
cry came again, as if from far above him; and, lifting his eyes to the
highest peak of all, he was sure that something moved there like the
flapping of great wings.

What could it be? What could be happening upon the highest mountain
peak in the world? He set himself to climb its sides, often so steep
and icy that he was over and over again on the point of giving up in
despair; and the higher he climbed the louder and more full of agony
became the cry. At last, after many days of toil, he reached the
topmost peak whence the cry came, and there he forgot hunger, cold,
and weariness in wonder at what he saw.

Bound to the rocks by huge chains, so that he could not move a limb,
lay what seemed a man, bigger than Hercules himself, with every muscle
drawn and writhing in agony. And with good reason, for a gigantic and
horrible vulture had his limbs in its talons and its beak in his
heart, which it was fiercely tearing.

The vulture was too busy at his cruel feast to see Hercules. But its
tortured victim cried--

"Depart, whoever you are: I am Prometheus the Titan, who tried to
conquer the strength of the gods by cunning, and am thus punished for
my sin forever."

And then he sent forth another dreadful cry as the vulture plunged its
beak into his heart again.

       *       *       *       *       *

Prometheus! Yes; it was nothing less than Prometheus the Titan, who,
when his race was beaten in the great battle with the gods of Olympus,
had stolen fire from heaven, and made Man, and who was thus punished
for having made what gave the gods such trouble. But Hercules, though
he knew all this, and the story of Pandora besides, exclaimed--

"Then, gods or no gods, sin or no sin, this shall not be!"

And at the word he grasped the vulture by the throat, and then
followed a struggle beside which even his battle with the hell-hound
Cerberus had been as nothing. For it was no common vulture of the
mountains: it was the demon of Remorse, whose beak had not left the
heart of Prometheus one moment for thousands and thousands of years.
But it was over at last, and the vulture lay strangled at the feet of
Hercules.

To free Prometheus from his chains was the work of a moment, and the
Titan rose and stretched his free limbs with a heart at ease.

       *       *       *       *       *

What passed between the Titan and the Mortal is beyond my guessing,
and I have never heard. I only know that a mere Man had, by his
strength and his courage, saved one who was greater and wiser than he
from Remorse and Despair. I have thought of this story till it means
too much for me to say anything more. Only, if you have forgotten the
story of Prometheus and Pandora, I should be glad if you will read it
again.


PART XI.--THE TUNIC OF NESSUS.

Hercules, passing through the land of Thessaly, fell deeply in love
with the Princess Iole, daughter of King Eurytus, whom her father, a
famous archer, had promised in marriage to the man who should fly an
arrow further than he.

This Hercules did with such ease that the king, angry at being
surpassed, refused to perform his promise, so that Hercules went mad
with rage and sorrow. In a sudden fury he slew Iphitus, a brother of
Iole, and his own friend and comrade, and then, still more maddened by
what he had done, wandered away again to Delphi to ask Apollo's oracle
once more what he should do.

But this time the voice of Apollo was silent. It seemed as if, in
spite of all he had done for men, the gods had turned away their faces
from him, and had become deaf to his prayers, even to his
repentance--for he would have given his own life if that would bring
Iphitus to life again. Were they angry because he had saved Prometheus
from their vengeance? Or were the labors of a life to be lost for one
moment of passion? Then were the gods unjust, and Hercules, who
abhorred injustice, broke forth against the gods themselves.

"I will no longer serve such wretches!" he cried. "Beings which bring
man into the world only to torment him, and to be a sport and a jest
for them! I will tear down their temples and destroy their altars; I
will side with the fallen Titans; I will sooner bear the punishment of
Prometheus forever, with none to save me, than serve monsters of
injustice, who allow man to sin and to suffer without help, and then
cast him away."

But Apollo was as deaf to his curses as to his prayers. So Hercules
put forth his whole strength against the temple, and no doubt would
have left it a ruin, when, from the clear sky there burst such flames
and thunders that the Titans themselves would have been dismayed. And
then spoke the oracle at last--

"Is this the free service you vowed when you chose between Pleasure
and Duty? It is the justice of the gods that you go back into slavery
again until you have learned how to be free."

The thunder and the lightning ceased, and Hercules saw beside him a
young man who looked like a traveling merchant--at least for such he
took him, until the stranger for one moment stood revealed as the god
Mercury, with winged heels and cap, and bearing the rod round which
two live serpents twined. It was only for a moment; the next, the god
became the traveling merchant again.

"As we are to be fellow-travelers," said Mercury, "I will tell you at
once that I am under orders from the Court of Olympus to take you to
market and sell you for a slave. Do you submit? Or do you wish to
learn from me the strength of heaven?"

"I wish I could learn its justice," said Hercules. "But I suppose I am
too stupid to understand. Everything is so dark and so strange. But
what does it all matter, after all? I would as soon be a slave as
anything else, now that I have lost Iole and killed my friend."

"That is not the right mood," said Mercury. "It is better to rebel, as
you did a minute ago, than to think that nothing matters, as you do
now. However, let us go."

Mercury was always the most delightful and amusing of companions; and
he was very good-natured also, and did his best to make the journey
cheerful. But, though he was the god of Eloquence, and of Business
besides, he could not persuade anybody to become the purchaser of
Hercules either by auction or by private bargain. Nobody wanted a
slave who looked so certain to become his master's master. Besides,
people had forgotten all his good deeds, and only remembered that he
had been a dangerous madman. But in time they came to a country in
Asia called Lydia, which was then ruled by a queen whose name was
Omphale. And she, having seen Hercules, was brave enough to buy him.

Of course Hercules expected that she would make him outdo what he had
done for Eurystheus; and nothing would have pleased him better than to
be sent on the most impossible errands, so that, in toil and danger,
he might forget his murder of Iphitus and his love for Iole. Instead,
however, of treating him like the most glorious hero of his time, and
employing him on services of honor, she amused herself by giving him a
spindle and distaff, and setting him to spin among her women, while
she robed herself in his lion-skin and tried to swing his club in her
delicate hands. And whenever he was clumsy with the distaff, which was
very often, she would laugh at him, and strike him across the face
with her slipper.

For three long years Hercules sat and span among Omphale's handmaids;
and then she, being tired of her amusement and of his submission, set
him free, and gave him back his club and lion-skin. They had been
three wasted, unwholesome years, and his strength had wasted with
them; moreover, his fame was being forgotten, and nothing seemed left
for him to do. How long it seemed since he had fought the Hydra and
borne upon his shoulders the weight of the sky--it was as if he had
become another and a feebler man.

       *       *       *       *       *

While waiting to see what should happen, he abode at the Court of King
Tyndarus of Sparta, the step-father of the great twin brethren, Castor
and Pollux, and of their sister Helen--the most beautiful woman in the
whole world; of whom you will hear more some day. And it was while
here that he heard of the fame of another beautiful woman, the
Princess Deianira, daughter of King Œneus of Ætolia, whose hand was
to be the prize of a great wrestling-match to be held at Calydon.
Hercules, longing for some adventure to try his strength again, betook
himself thither; and, weakened though he was, overthrew every one of
his rivals with ease. Then, after his marriage with Deianira, he set
out with her for the Court of King Ceyx of Trachinia, where he
intended to remain a while.

But when they reached the river Evenus, which they had to cross on
their way from Calydon to Trachinia, the water was so swollen with
heavy rains that Hercules did not know how to bring his wife over. As
they stood wondering what they should do without boat or bridge, there
cantered up a Centaur, who saw the plight they were in, and said--

"I am Nessus. If this fair lady will deign to seat herself upon my
back, I will swim over with her quickly; and then I will come back for
you also."

He spoke frankly and courteously; so Hercules, thinking no harm,
lifted Deianira upon the back of the Centaur, who plunged into the
river, and soon reached the other side. But on landing, instead of
performing his promise, he set off at a gallop; and it was soon clear
enough that he meant to run away with Deianira, while Hercules stood
helpless beyond the river.

He was almost out of sight when Hercules let fly an arrow, which had
been dipped in the poison of the Hydra, with such force and so true an
aim that it pierced the Centaur without touching Deianira. Nessus fell
to the earth, and, feeling himself dying, said to her--

"I die for love of you; but I forgive you freely. Take my tunic; for
it is of magic power. If your husband's heart ever strays from you,
bid him wear it, and his love will return to you and never wander
again."

So saying, he groaned and died; and Deianira, having taken from him
his blood-stained tunic, waited there till Hercules, having found a
ford higher up the river, was able to rejoin her. And so at last they
reached the Court of King Ceyx, who received them with all kindness
and honor.

Here they dwelt in great content; nor was there any cause why they
should not have spent all their life to come in rest and peace, had
not, by ill luck, a great war broken out between King Ceyx and King
Eurytus of Thessaly. Hercules gained the victory for his host; King
Eurytus was slain; and then--among the prisoners of war was the slain
king's daughter, Iole; she on whose account Hercules had killed
Iphitus, and cursed the gods, and been a slave.

Yet, seeing her again, all thought of Deianira passed away from him,
and his love for Iole was stronger even than at first; while he found
that her love had remained true to him and unchanged. He could not
part from her, and so he took her with him to Mount Œta, where he
was about to sacrifice to Jupiter in honor of his victory.

The altar was prepared, and the sacrifice was ready, when there
arrived from Trachinia, the city of King Ceyx, his servant Lichas, who
knelt before him, and said--

"The Princess Deianira, your loving wife, has heard of this great
sacrifice, and sends you by me this tunic, which she prays you to wear
for her sake, that she may have some part in your thanksgiving."

But in truth it was of her husband's love for Iole that Deianira had
heard; and therefore she had sent him the tunic of Nessus, which was
to bring his heart back to her again.

Little she guessed the cunning revenge of the Centaur, who knew that
the arrow of Hercules, in piercing the tunic, had left upon it a drop
of the poison of the Hydra. Hercules put on the gift of Deianira, and,
accompanied only by Prince Philoctetes of Melibœa, ascended Mount
Œta to celebrate the sacrifice. But no sooner had he reached the
altar than the poison began to work, eating through his skin into his
flesh, even to his bones, so that his agony was too great to bear.

He tried to tear off the fatal tunic; but the more he tore at it the
more it clung. At last the agony began to gnaw his heart, and he
despaired.

"Would," he cried, "that I had never been born! My strength has been
my curse. I have labored to clear the world of evil; and pain and sin
are still as strong as if the serpents had strangled me in my cradle.
The Hydra is dead, but its poison goes on working; and open savage
force is only changed into fraud and guile. Happier is Eurystheus,
whom weakness and cowardice have kept from doing harm; wiser are they
who choose peace and pleasure; who sit with folded hands, and let
monsters and ogres devour whomsoever else they will. As for me, I have
been a curse to those whom I have loved the best, and leave more evil
in the world than I found. There is no use in strength, since it can
be conquered by pain; nor in subduing others, when one cannot master
one's own self; nor in duty without knowledge; nor in life, which is
only blunder and misery and toil and sin. The best thing is never to
have been born; and the next best thing is to die."

So he gave his bow and arrows to Philoctetes, whom he swore to bury
his ashes in the earth, and never to reveal where they were laid.
"For," said he, "I wish to sleep and forget and be forgotten. I will
not that men shall pay me even so much honor as a tomb." Then he
spread his lion skin over the altar, and laid himself upon it with his
club for a pillow, and bade Philoctetes set fire to it, so that he
might die, not of poison and treachery, but like a man, and of his own
free will, making himself the sacrifice he had vowed.

Philoctetes mournfully obeyed. And thus miserably perished Hercules,
the greatest and last of the heroes; for after him there came no more.
Thus died the strongest of men, in the belief that all effort is
useless, and that he had lived in vain.

       *       *       *       *       *

But the gods knew better; for not once had they been unjust, in spite
of seeming. They knew both his strength and his weakness; they saw the
whole man--often foolish and sinful and weak; often failing and
falling, but willing what was right, and loving it even when he fell
into wrong. They judged him by his whole life, not by its wretched
end, when he was maddened by passion and tortured by pain. The gods
remembered how he had chosen between Pleasure and Duty; how he had
striven with Tartarus for the life of Alcestis; how he had scaled
Caucasus because he had heard a cry of pain; how, even when he cursed
the gods at Delphi, it was because he thought them unjust, and because
he loved justice and hated injustice with his whole soul and being. He
might hold his own service cheap; but not they, for, with the gods,
effort cannot fail: to fight is the same thing as to conquer. If
Hercules had cut off ninety-nine of the Hydra's heads, and been slain
by the hundredth, men would still have held him a hero. And so was it
with the gods. They had watched his long battle with the Hydra of Life
and Evil, and did not condemn him because he was slain before the end.

And so, in the fire of the altar on Mount Œta, his pains, his sins,
his weaknesses, were purged away. And even as he was the only mortal
who ever conquered Tartarus, so was he the only one who ever received
such reward. Instead of being sent among the happy shades of the
Elysian fields, he was received into the glory of Olympus, among the
gods themselves, there, with strength made pure and perfect, to serve
and help mankind forever.




THE APPLE OF DISCORD.


Never was such a wedding-feast known as that of Peleus and Thetis. And
no wonder; for Peleus was King of Thessaly, and Thetis was a
goddess--the goddess who keeps the gates of the West, and throws them
open for the chariot of the Sun to pass through when its day's journey
is done.

Not only all the neighboring kings and queens came to the feast, but
the gods and goddesses besides, bringing splendid presents to the
bride and bridegroom. Only one goddess was not there, because she had
not been invited; and she had not been invited for the best of all
reasons. Her name was Ate, which means Mischief; and wherever she went
she caused quarreling and confusion. Jupiter had turned her out of
heaven for setting even the gods by the ears; and ever since then she
had been wandering about the earth, making mischief, for they would
not have her even in Hades.

"So they won't have Me at their feast!" she said to herself, when she
heard the sound of the merriment to which she had not been bidden.
"Very well; they shall be sorry. I see a way to make a bigger piece
of mischief than ever was known."

So she took a golden apple, wrote some words upon it, and, keeping
herself out of sight, threw it into the very middle of the feasters,
just when they were most merry.

Nobody saw where the apple came from; but of course they supposed it
had been thrown among them for frolic; and one of the guests, taking
it up, read aloud the words written on it. The words were:--

    "FOR THE MOST BEAUTIFUL!"

--nothing more.

"What a handsome present somebody has sent me!" said Juno, holding out
her hand for the apple.

"Sent _you_?" asked Diana. "What an odd mistake, to be sure! Don't you
see it is for the most beautiful? I will thank you to hand me what is
so clearly intended for _Me_."

"You seem to forget _I_ am present!" said Vesta, making a snatch at
the apple.

"Not at all!" said Ceres; "only _I_ happen to be here, too. And who
doubts that where I am there is the most beautiful?"

"Except where _I_ am," said Proserpine.

"What folly is all this!" said Minerva, the wise. "Wisdom is the only
true beauty; and everybody knows that I am the wisest of you all."

"But it's for the _most_ beautiful!" said Venus. "The idea of its
being for anybody but Me!"

Then every nymph and goddess present, and even every woman, put in her
claim, until from claiming and disputing it grew to arguing and
wrangling and downright quarreling: insults flew about, until the
merriment grew into an angry din, the like of which had never been
heard. But as it became clear that it was impossible for everybody to
be the most beautiful, the claimants gradually settled down into three
parties--some taking the side of Venus, others of Juno, others of
Minerva.

"We shall never settle it among ourselves," said one, when all were
fairly out of breath with quarreling. "Let the gods decide."

For the gods had been silent all the while; and now they looked at one
another in dismay at such an appeal. Jupiter, in his heart, thought
Venus the most beautiful; but how could he dare decide against either
his wife Juno or his daughter Minerva? Neptune hated Minerva on
account of their old quarrel; but it was awkward to choose between his
daughter Venus and his sister Juno, of whose temper he, as well as
Jupiter, stood in awe. Mars was ready enough to vote for Venus; but
then he was afraid of a scandal. And so with all the gods--not one was
bold enough to decide on such a terrible question as the beauty of
three rival goddesses who were ready to tear out each other's eyes.
For Juno was looking like a thunder-cloud, and Minerva like lightning,
and Venus like a smiling but treacherous sea.

"I have it," said Jupiter at last. "Men are better judges of beauty
than the gods are, who never see anything but its perfection. King
Priam of Troy has a son named Paris, whose judgment as a critic I
would take even before my own. I propose that you, Juno, and you,
Minerva, and you, Venus, shall go together before Paris and submit
yourselves to his decision, whatever it may be."

And so it was settled, for each of the three goddesses was equally
sure that, whoever the judge might be, the golden apple was safe to be
hers. The quarrel came to an end, and the feast ended pleasantly; but
Ate, who had been watching and listening, laughed in her sleeve.

       *       *       *       *       *

Troy, where King Priam reigned, was a great and ancient city on the
shore of Asia: it was a sacred city, whose walls had been built by
Neptune, and it possessed the Palladium, the image of Minerva, which
kept it from all harm. Priam--who had been the friend of Hercules--and
his wife Hecuba had many sons and daughters, all brave and noble
princes and beautiful princesses; and of his sons, while the bravest
and noblest was his first-born, Hector, the handsomest and most
amiable was Paris, whom Jupiter had appointed to be the judge of
beauty.

Paris, unlike his brothers, cared nothing for affairs of State, but
lived as a shepherd upon Mount Ida with his wife Œnone, a nymph of
that mountain, in perfect happiness and peace, loved and honored by
the whole country round, which had given him the name of "Alexander,"
which means "The Helper." One would think that if anybody was safe
from the mischief of Ate, it was he.

But one day, while he was watching his flocks and thinking of
Œnone, there came to him what he took for three beautiful
women--the most beautiful he had ever seen. Yet something told him
they were more than mere women, or even than Oreads, before the
tallest said--

"There is debate in Olympus which is the most beautiful of us three,
and Jupiter has appointed you to be the judge between us. I am Juno,
the queen of gods and men, and if you decide for me, I will make you
king of the whole world."

"And I," said the second, "am Minerva, and you shall know everything
in the whole universe if you decide for me."

"But I," said the third, "am Venus, who can give neither wisdom nor
power; but if you decide for me, I will give you the love of the most
beautiful woman that ever was or ever will be born."

Paris looked from one to the other, wondering to which he should award
the golden apple, the prize of beauty. He did not care for power: he
would be quite content to rule his sheep, and even that was not always
easy. Nor did he care for wisdom or knowledge: he had enough for all
his needs. Nor ought he to have desired any love but Œnone's. But
then Venus was really the most beautiful of all the goddesses--the
very goddess of beauty; no mortal could refuse anything she asked him,
so great was her charm. So he took the apple and placed it in the
hands of Venus without a word, while Juno and Minerva departed in a
state of wrath with Paris, Venus, and each other, which made Ate laugh
to herself more than ever.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now the most beautiful woman in the whole world was Helen,
step-daughter of King Tyndarus of Sparta, and sister of Castor and
Pollux: neither before her nor after her has there been any to compare
with her for beauty. Thirty-one of the noblest princes in Greece came
to her father's Court at the same time to seek her in marriage, so
that Tyndarus knew not what to do, seeing that, whomsoever he chose
for his son-in-law, he would make thirty powerful enemies. The most
famous among them were Ulysses, King of the Island of Ithaca; Diomed,
King of Ætolia; Ajax, King of Salamis, the bravest and strongest man
in Greece; his brother Teucer; Philoctetes, the friend of Hercules;
and Menelaus, King of Sparta. At last, as there was no other way of
deciding among them, an entirely new idea occurred to Ulysses--namely,
that Helen should be allowed to choose her own husband herself, and
that, before she chose, all the rival suitors should make a great and
solemn oath to approve her choice, and to defend her and her husband
against all enemies thenceforth and forever. This oath they all took
loyally and with one accord, and Helen chose Menelaus, King of Sparta,
who married her with great rejoicing, and took her away to his
kingdom.

And all would have gone well but for that wretched apple. For Venus
was faithful to her promise that the most beautiful of all women
should be the wife of Paris: and so Menelaus, returning from a
journey, found that a Trojan prince had visited his Court during his
absence, and had gone away, taking Helen with him to Troy. This Trojan
prince was Paris, who, seeing Helen, had forgotten Œnone, and could
think of nothing but her whom Venus had given him.

Then, through all Greece and all the islands, went forth the summons
of King Menelaus, reminding the thirty princes of their great oath:
and each and all of them, and many more, came to the gathering-place
with all their ships and all their men, to help Menelaus and to bring
back Helen. Such a host as gathered together at Aulis had never been
seen since the world began; there were nearly twelve hundred ships and
more than a hundred thousand men: it was the first time that all the
Greeks joined together in one cause. There, besides those who had come
for their oath's sake, were Nestor, the old King of Pylos--so old that
he remembered Jason and the Golden Fleece, but, at ninety years old,
as ready for battle as the youngest there; and Achilles, the son of
Peleus and Thetis, scarcely more than a boy, but fated to outdo the
deeds of the bravest of them all. The kings and princes elected
Agamemnon, King of Mycenæ and Argos, and brother of Menelaus, to be
their general-in-chief; and he forthwith sent a herald to Troy to
demand the surrender of Helen.

But King Priam was indignant that these chiefs of petty kingdoms
should dare to threaten the sacred city of Troy: and he replied to the
demand by a scornful challenge, and by sending out his summons also to
his friends and allies. And it was as well answered as that of
Menelaus had been. There came to his standard Rhesus, with a great
army from Thrace; and Sarpedon, the greatest king in all Asia; and
Memnon, king of Æthiopia, with twenty thousand men--the hundred
thousand Greeks were not so many as the army of Priam. Then Agamemnon
gave the order to sail for Troy: and Ate laughed aloud, for her apple
had brought upon mankind the First Great War.

       *       *       *       *       *

And now I seem to be waking from a dream which is fading away. The
gods are becoming shadows, vanishing farther and farther away from
man. I could tell you, if I would, the story of how Troy was taken and
burned after ten years of fighting, and how Priam and his sons were
slain; of the wonderful adventures of Ulysses by sea and land before
he returned home; of the deeds of Achilles and Hector; of how the few
Trojans who escaped the slaughter followed Prince Æneas into Italy,
where he made a kingdom, and was the forefather of Romulus, who built
the city of Rome; which brings us from Mythology--the stories of gods
and heroes--into History--the stories of men. All these things came
from Ate's apple: yes, even the history of Rome, and of England, and
of all the world.

You will read in the great poems of Homer the story of the siege of
Troy and the wanderings of Ulysses; and in the "Æneid" of Virgil--to
my mind the very greatest of all poems--the whole story of Æneas. But
my stories end where the great poets begin theirs. I seem, as I have
said, to have been dreaming a long dream: and before I quite wake I
see the gods growing fainter and fainter, year by year and century by
century, while men and women believed in them less and less,
until--when they were well-nigh forgotten, or thought of only as
poets' fables--there came a great loud cry which made the whole world
sigh and tremble:--

    "PAN IS DEAD!"

men heard all Nature cry; and they knew it to mean that the last of
the gods was no more; that a new time had come for the world. And that
same night a star rose into sight at Bethlehem, and stood over the
manger where a young Child lay.

And yet, gone and lost though the gods be, you will be very blind
indeed if you never catch a glimpse of a Dryad in the woods or of an
Oread on the hill; if you never think of Hercules when things seem
against you and hard to understand; if you do not see in Perseus the
true knight that a true man should strive to be. What more shall I say
before I lay down my pen? Only that these stories are not
nonsense--no, not one of them; that the more one thinks of them the
wiser he is; and that I love them so much, and think so much of what
made me begin them, that I cannot believe that I have come to the
end.




PRONOUNCING VOCABULARY OF PROPER NAMES.

KEY TO DIACRITICAL MARKS


    ā as in fāte
    à as in senàte
    ă as in făt
    ä as in ärm
    a̤ as in a̤ll
    ȧ as in ȧsk

    ē as in mēte
    è as in èvent
    ĕ as in mĕt
    ẽ as in hẽr

    ī as in īce
    ì as in ìdea
    ĭ as in ĭt
    ĩ as in sĩr

    ō as in ōld
    ò as in òbey
    ŏ as in nŏt
    ô as in nôr

    ū as in ūse
    ù as in ùnite
    ŭ as in ŭp
    ụ as in pụll

    y = i

    c as in call
    ç as in çity
    c̵ as in sc̵hool

    g as in go
    ġ as in caġe
    ṉ as in iṉk
    ph as in phantom

    æ and œ = e
    eu = ū
    s̝ as in his̝

All other unmarked consonants have their usual English sounds. Silent
letters are italicized.

Vowels when obscured and turned toward the neutral sound are marked
thus, a̯, e̯, etc.

In the terminations _as_, _on_, and some others, words familiar in
English have the vowels marked obscure; less familiar words have the
vowels marked short: Ænea̯s, Amyclăs; Jaso̯n, Typhŏn, etc.

The termination _eus_ from Greek nouns of the third declension in
ευς is treated as one syllable, though its resolution into two
syllables is admissible on good authority: Brī´a̯rēūs or Brìā´rè ŭs,
Or´phēūs or Or´phè ŭs, etc.

    Ăb sỹr´tŭs
    Ă c̵h´è rŏn
    Ȧ c̵hĭl´lēs̝
    Ȧ crĭs´ĭ ŭs
    Ăc tǣ´ŏn
    Ăd mē´tŭs
    Ȧ dō´nĭs
    Ǣ´a̯
    Ǣ´a̯ cŭs
    Æ̀ ē´tēs̝
    Æ̀ ġē´a̯n
    Æ̀ ġē´ŭs
    Æ̀ nē´a̯s
    Æ̀ nē´ĭd
    Æ̆s cù lā´pĭ ŭs
    Ǣ´so̯n
    Ǣ thĭ ō´pĭ a̯
    Ǣ´thra̯
    Æ̆t´na̯
    Æ̀ tō´lĭ a̯
    Ăf´rĭ ca̯
    Ăg a̯ mĕm´no̯n
    Ā´jăx
    Ăl çǣ´ŭs
    Ăl çĕs´tĭs
    Ălc mē´na̯
    Ăl çȳ´ò nè
    Ăl phē´ŭs
    Ăl thǣ´a̯
    Ȧ mā´sĭs
    Ăm´mo̯n
    Ăm phī´o̯n
    Ăm phĭ trī´tè
    Ăm phĭt´ry̆ ŏn
    Ăm´y̆ clăs
    Ăn drŏm´è da̯
    Ȧ nĕm´ò nè
    Ăn tǣ´ŭs
    Ăph rò dī´tè
    Ȧ pŏl´lò
    Ȧ răc̵h´nè
    Är cā´dĭ a̯
    Är´gò
    Är´gò lĭs
    Är´gò na̤_u_ts
    Är´gŏs
    À rĭ ăd´nè
    Ăs cū´la̯ phŭs
    Ā´sĭ a̯
     (sh)
    Ăs tĕr´ò pè
    Ăt a̯ lăn´ta̯
    Ā´tè
    Ăth´a̯ măs
    Ȧ thē´næ̀
    Ȧ thē´nè
    Ăt´la̯s
    Ăt´tĭ ca̯
    A̤_u_´ġè ăs
    A̤_u_´lĭs
    A̤_u_ rō´ra̯
    A̤_u_ tŏl´y̆ cŭs

    Băc c̵hŭs
    Ba̤_u_´bò
    Brī´a̯ reus
    Bù sī´rĭs

    Cā´cŭs
    Căd´mŭs
    _cȧ dū cè ŭs_
           (sh)
    Căl lī´ò pè
    Căl´y̆ dŏn
    Căp pa̯ dō´cĭ a̯
             (sh)
    Căs tā´lĭ a̯
    Căs´to̯r
    Ca̤_u_ cā´sia̯n
               (sh)
    Ca̤_u_´ca̯ sŭs
    Cà y̆s´tẽr
    Çè lǣ´nò
    Çē´pheus
    Çẽr´bè rŭs
    Çẽr´çy̆ ŏn
    Çē´rēs̝
    _çĕs´tŭs_
    Çē´y̆x
    C̵hā´rŏn
    C̵hȧ ry̆b´dĭs
    C̵hè lō´nè
    C̵hī´a̯n
    C̵hī´ŏs
    C̵hī´rŏn
    C̵hrỳ sā´ôr
    Çì thǣ´rŏn
    Cly̆m´è nè
    Clȳ´t_i_è _or_ Cly̆t´ĭ è
    Cò cȳ´tŭs
    Çœ̄´lŭm
    Çœ̄´lŭs
    Çŏl´c̵hĭs
    Cŏr´ĭnth
    Crē´ŏn
    Crēt_e_
    Crē´theus
    Crè ū´sa̯
    Cū´pĭd
    Çȳ´a̯ nè
    Çȳ clō´pēs̝
    Çȳ´clŏps
    Çy̆n´thĭ a̯
    Çy̆n´thĭ ŭs
    Çy̆n´thŭs
    Çy̆p a̯ rĭs´sŭs
    Çȳ´prŭs

    Dæ̆d´a̯ lŭs
    Dăn´a̯ è
    Dȧ nā´ĭ dēs̝
    Dăn´a̯ ŭs
    Dăph´nè
    Där da̯ nĕl_le_s̝
    Dē ia̯ nī´ra̯
      (y)
    Dē´lŏs
    Dĕl´phī
    Dè mē´tẽr
    Deu cā´lĭ o̯n
    Dì ā´na̯ _or_ Dì ăn´a̯
    Dĭc´ty̆s
    Dī´ò mĕd
    Dī ò mē´dēs̝

    Ĕc̵h´ò
    Ē´gy̆pt
    È lĕc´tra̯
    È lĕc´try̆ ŏn
    Ē´lĭs
    È ly̆s̝´ĭ a̯n
    È ly̆s̝´ĭ ŭm
    Ĕn dy̆m´ĭ o̯n
    Ĕn´na̯
    Ĕp´a̯ phŭs
    Ĕp ĭ mē´theus
    Ẽr ġī´nŭs
    È rĭn´y̆ ēs̝
    Ĕr y̆ măn´thŭs
    Eu mĕn´ĭ dēs̝
    Eu mŏl´pŭs
    Eu´ro̯p_e_
    Eu ry̆d´ĭ çè
    Eu ry̆s´theus
    Eu´ry̆ tŭs
    Eux´ĭn_e_
    È vē´nŭs

    Gā´dēs̝
    Găn´y̆ mēd_e_
    Gĕr´y̆ ŏn
    Gĭ bra̤l´ta̯r
    Gôr´go̯n
    Grā´ia̯
      (y)
    Grā´iæ̀
      (y)

    Hā´dēs̝
    Här´py̆
    Hē´bè
    Hĕc´à tè _or_ Hĕc´àte
    Hĕc´to̯r
    Hĕc´ù ba̯
    Hĕl´ĕn
    Hĕl´ĭ co̯n
    Hĕl´lè
    Hĕl´lĕs pŏnt
    Hẽr´cù lēs̝
    Hĕs pĕr´ĭ dēs̝
    Hĭp´pò crēn_e_
    Hĭp pŏl´y̆ta̯
    Hō´mẽr
    Hȳ a̯ çĭn´thŭs
    Hȳ´dra̯
    Hy̆r´ĭ eus

    Ĭc´a̯ rŭs
    Ī´da̯
    Ī´nò
    Ī´ò la̯s
    Ìŏl´cŏs
    Ī´ò lè
    Ĭph´ĭ clēs̝
    Ī´rĭs
    Ĭt´a̯ ly̆
    Ĭth´a̯ ca̯
    Ĭx ī´o̯n

    Jā´so̯n
    Jū´nò
    Jū´pĭ tẽr

    Lăb´y̆ rĭnth
    Lăç è dǣ´mo̯n
    Lȧ rĭs´sa̯
    Lăt´mŏs
    Lȧ tō´na̯
    Lĕm nŏs
    Lĕm´ù rēs̝
    Lẽr´na̯
    Lē´thè
    Leu cŏth´ò è
    Lĭb´y̆ a̯
    Lī´c̵hăs
    Lī´nŭs
    Lū´na̯
    Ly̆d´ĭ a̯

    Mā´ia̯
      (y)
    Măr´a̯ tho̯n
    Mär´mò ra̯
    Märs̝
    Mär´sy̆ ăs
    Ma̤_u_ rĭ tā´nĭ a̯
    Mè dē´a̯
    Mĕd ĭ tĕr rā´nè a̯n
    Mē´dŭs
    Mè dū´sa̯
    Mĕl ē´a̯ ġẽr
    Mĕl ĭ bœ̄´a̯
    Mĕm´nŏn
    Mĕn è lā´ŭs
    Mẽr´cù ry̆
    Mĕr´ò pè
    Mī´dăs
    Mĭn ẽr´va̯
    Mī´nŏs
    Mĭn´ò ta̤_u_r
    Mò rŏc´cò
    Mỳ çē´næ̀

    När çĭs´sŭs
    Năx´ŏs
    Nē´mè a̯
    Nĕm´è sĭs
    Nĕph´è lè
    Nĕp´tūn_e_
    Nē´rè ĭd
    Nē´reus
    Nĕs´sŭs
    Nì çĭp´pè
    Ni´ò bè

    Ò çè ăn´ĭ dēs̝
    Ò çē´a̯ nŭs
    Œ̅´neus
    Œ̆n´ò è
    Œ̀ nō´nè
    Œ̀ nō´pĭ ŏn
    Œ̅´ta̯
    Ò ly̆m´pŭs
    Ŏm´pha̯ lè
    Ôr´c̵ha̯ mŭs
    Ò rī´o̯n
    Ôr´pheus
    Ŏv´ĭd

    Păc tō´lŭs
    Păl lā´dĭ ŭm
    Păn
    Păn dō´ra̯
    Păr´ĭs
    Pär năs´sŭs
    Pē´leus
    Pē´lĭ ăs
    Pẽr´gŭs
    Pẽr´seus
    _pĕt´ a̯ sŭs_
    Phā´è tho̯n
    Phē´ræ̀
    Phē´rēs̝
    Phĭl ŏc tē´tēs̝
    Phī´neus
    Phlĕġ´è thŏn
    Phœ̄´bè
    Phœ̄´bŭs
    Phō´lŭs
    Phry̆ġ´ĭa̯
    Phry̆x´ŭs
    Plà tǣ´a̯
    Plē´ia̯ dēs̝
       (y)
    Plū´tò
    Pō
    Pŏl´lŭx
    Pò ly̆c´rȧ tēs̝
    Pŏl y̆ dĕc´tēs̝
    Prī´a̯m
    Prò crŭs´tēs̝
    Prò mē´theus
    Prŏs´er pĭn_e_
    Prō´teus
    _P_sȳ´c̵hè
    Pȳ´lŏs
    Py̆r´è nēēs
    Py̆r´r_h_a̯
    Pȳ´thŏn

    R_h_ăd a̯ măn´thŭs
    R_h_ē´a̯
    R_h_ē´sŭs
    Rŏm´ù lŭs

    Sā´bra̯
    Sa̯ hä´ra̯
    Săl´a̯ mĭs
    Sā´mŏs
    Sär pē´do̯n
    Săt´ŭrn
    S_c_ī´rŏn
    S_c_y̆l´la̯
    S_c_ȳ´rŏs
    Sè rī´phŭs
    Sì lē´nŭs
    Sī´rĕn
    Sĭs´y̆ phŭs
    Spā_i_n
    Spär´ta̯
    Sthĕn´è lŭs
    Sty̆m phā´lŭs
    Sty̆x
    Sȳ´rĭnx

    Tæ̆n´a̯ rŭs
    _tȧ lā´rĭ a̯_
    Tăn´ta̯ lŭs
    Tär´ta̯ rŭs
    Tày̆ġ´è ta̯
    Tĕr´ra̯
    Tē´thy̆s
    Teu´çẽr
    Thēb_e_s̝
    Thē´mĭs
    Thĕs´pĭ ŭs
    Thĕs´sa̯ ly̆
    Thē´tĭs
    Tī´phy̆s
    Tī´ta̯n
    Tĭ thō´nŭs
    Tĭt´y̆ ŭs
    Tra̯ c̵hĭn´ĭ a̯
    Trœ̀ zē´nè
    Ty̆n´da̯ rŭs
    Tȳ´phŏn

    Ù ly̆s´sēs̝

    Vē´nŭs
    Vĕs´ta̯
    Vir´gĭl
    Vŭl´ca̯n

    Zĕph´y̆ rŭs
    Zō´dĭ ăc




ANNOUNCEMENTS


CLASSICS FOR CHILDREN

This series of books consists so far as possible of complete works
from the great masters, specially edited to meet the wants of young
people in the school and in the home.

    Æsop's Fables
    Andersen's Fairy Tales, Part 1
    Andersen's Fairy Tales, Part 2
    Arabian Nights
    Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress
    Burt's Stories from Plato
    Cervantes's Don Quixote
    Chamisso's Peter Schlemihl
    Chesterfield's Letters
    Church's Stories of the Old World
    Defoe's Robinson Crusoe
    Dickens's Tale of Two Cities
    Epictetus
    Fiske-Irving's Washington
    Fouqué's Undine
    Francillon's Gods and Heroes
    Franklin: His Life by Himself
    Goldsmith's Vicar of Wakefield
    Grimm's Fairy Tales, Part I
    Grimm's Fairy Tales, Part II
    Grote and Ségur's Two Great Retreats
    Hughes's Tom Brown at Rugby
    Hugo's Jean Valjean
    Irving's Alhambra
    Irving's Sketch-Book (Six Selections)
    Jefferies's Sir Bevis
    Johnson's Rasselas
    Kingsley's Greek Heroes
    Kingsley's Water-Babies
    Lamb's Adventures of Ulysses
    Lamb's Tales from Shakespeare
    Litchfield's Nine Worlds
    Marcus Aurelius
    Martineau's Peasant and the Prince
    Montgomery's Heroic Ballads
    Plutarch's Lives
    Ramée's Bimbi
    Ruskin, Selections from
    Ruskin's King of the Golden River
    Saintine's Picciola
    Scott's Guy Mannering
      Ivanhoe
      Lady of the Lake
      Lay of the Last Minstrel
      Marmion
      Old Mortality
      Quentin Durward
      Rob Roy
      Tales of a Grandfather
      Talisman
    Shakespeare's Merchant of Venice
    Southey's Life of Nelson
    Spyri's Heidi
    Swift's Gulliver's Travels
    White's Selborne
    Williams and Foster's Selections for Memorizing
    Wyss's Swiss Family Robinson

GINN & COMPANY Publishers


STORIES OF THE ANCIENT GREEKS

By CHARLES D. SHAW

Illustrated by George A. Harker. 12mo. Cloth. 264 pages. List price,
60 cents; mailing price, 70 cents

This collection of stories of the ancient Greeks is intended for
supplementary reading, and may be used profitably as early as the
third year. It includes many of the charming tales of the Greek
mythology retold in a manner suitable for young people. The second
part of the volume deals more particularly with Greek history. The
familiar stories are given in chronological order. Sufficient
attention is everywhere paid to the matter of guarding the reader
against too implicit belief in tales which have been partially
discredited by modern research. Yet it has been thought wise to keep
in currency narratives which have so long added to the pleasure of the
world, though they cannot be defended as actual history.

The style is simple, picturesque, and vivacious. The twenty-five
full-page illustrations, from original decorative pen drawings by
George A. Harker, are unusually attractive and help to explain the
text. The special cream-tinted paper, the attractive binding, and
artistic arrangement of type and illustrations give a pleasing and
appropriate setting to the text.

GINN & COMPANY Publishers




Transcriber's Note

Variations in spelling are preserved as printed.

Minor punctuation errors have been fixed.

Hyphenation has been made consistent.

The author sometimes employed a writing style where a word is dropped
from a phrase--for example, "Who gave it you?" rather than "Who gave
it to you?", or "though ignorant who she was" rather than "though
ignorant of who she was." All such instances are preserved as printed.

The following printer error has been fixed:

    Page 239--sacrified amended to sacrificed--... every
    foreigner entering the country should be sacrificed ...





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Gods and Heroes, by R. E. Francillon

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GODS AND HEROES ***

***** This file should be named 45416-0.txt or 45416-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/5/4/1/45416/

Produced by Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe, Sam W. and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

