The Project Gutenberg EBook of Bird Guide, by Chester A. Reed

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Bird Guide
       Water Birds, Game Birds, and Birds of Prey

Author: Chester A. Reed

Release Date: August 6, 2014 [EBook #46516]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BIRD GUIDE ***




Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, Chris Curnow and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






[Illustration: Ruffed Grouse.]




                               BIRD GUIDE
               Water Birds, Game Birds and Birds of Prey


                                   BY
                            CHESTER A. REED
                               Author of
North American Birds’ Eggs, and, with Frank M. Chapman, of Color Key to
North American Birds. Curator in Ornithology, Worcester Natural History
                                Society


                        GARDEN CITY    NEW YORK
                       DOUBLEDAY, PAGE & COMPANY
                                  1921

                           Copyrighted 1906.
                   Copyrighted, 1910, CHAS. K. REED,
                            Worcester, Mass.




                                PREFACE


While strolling through a piece of woodland, or perhaps along the marsh
or seashore, we see a bird, a strange bird—one we never saw before.
Instantly, our curiosity is aroused, and the question arises, “What is
it?” There is the bird! How can we find out what kind it is? The
Ornithologist of a few years ago had but one course open to him, that is
to shoot the bird, take it home, then pore through pages of
descriptions, until one was found to correspond with the specimen.
Obviously, such methods cannot be pursued today, both humane and
economical reasons prohibiting. We have but one alternative left us: We
must make copious notes of all the peculiarities and markings of the
bird that is before us. On our return home, we get down our bird books,
and there are many excellent ones. After carefully looking through the
whole library, we find that, although many of our books are well
illustrated, none of them has the picture of what we seek, so we adopt
the tactics of the “Old-time” Ornithologist, before mentioned, and pore
over pages of text, until finally we know what our bird was. It is for
just such emergencies as this—to identify a bird when you see it, and
where you see it, that this little pocket “Bird Guide” is prepared. May
it be the medium for saving many of today’s seekers for “bird truths”
from the many trials and tribulations willingly encountered, and hard
and thorny roads gladly traveled by the author in his quest for
knowledge of bird ways.

                                                        CHESTER A. REED.

  Worcester, Mass.
    1906.




                              INTRODUCTION


The study of the birds included in this book is much more difficult than
that of the small land birds. Many of the birds are large; some are very
rare; all are usually shy and have keen eyesight, trained to see at a
distance; in fact, many of them have to depend upon their vigilance for
their very existence. Therefore, you will find that the majority of
these birds will have to be studied at long range. Sometimes, by
exercising care and forethought, you may be able to approach within a
few feet of the bird you seek, or induce him to come to you. It is this
pitting your wits against the cunning of the birds that furnishes
one-half of the interest in their study. Remember that a quick motion
will always cause a bird to fly. If you seek a flock of plover on the
shore, or a heron in the marsh, try to sneak up behind cover if
possible; if not, walk very slowly, and with as little motion as
possible, directly towards them; by so doing you often will get near,
for a bird is a poor judge of distance, while a single step sideways
would cause him to fly. Shore birds can usually be best observed from a
small “blind,” near the water’s edge, where they feed. Your powers of
observation will be increased about tenfold if you are equipped with a
good pair of field glasses; they are practically indispensable to the
serious student and add greatly to the pleasures of anyone. Any good
glass, that has a wide field of vision and magnifies three or four
diameters, is suitable; we can recommend the ones described in the back
of this book.

WHAT TO MAKE NOTE OF.—What is the nature of the locality where seen;
marsh, shore, woods, etc? If in trees does it sit upright or horizontal?
If on the ground, does it run or walk, easily or with difficulty? If in
the water, can it swim well, can it dive, does it swim under water, can
it fly from the water easily, or does it have to patter over the surface
before flying? What does it seem to be eating? Does it have any notes?
Does it fly rapidly; with rapid wing beats or not; in a straight line or
otherwise? Does it sail, or soar? In flocks or singly? These and
hundreds of other questions that may suggest themselves, are of great
interest and importance.

A PLEA TO SPORTSMEN.—Many of the birds shown in this book are Game
Birds, that is, birds that the law allows you to shoot at certain
seasons of the year. Some of these are still abundant and will be for
numbers of years; others are very scarce and if they are further hunted,
will become entirely exterminated in two or three years. Bob-whites are
very scarce in New England; Prairie Hens are becoming scarce in parts of
the west; the small Curlew is practically extinct, while the larger ones
are rapidly going. In behalf of all bird lovers, we ask that you refrain
from killing those species that you know are rare, and use moderation in
the taking of all others. We also ask that you use any influence that
may be yours to further laws prohibiting all traffic in birds. The man
who makes his living shooting birds will make more, live longer and die
happier tilling the soil than by killing God’s creatures. We do not,
now, ask you to refrain from hunting entirely, but get your sport at
your traps. It takes more skill to break a clay pigeon than to kill a
quail.

[Illustration: TOPOGRAPHY OF A BIRD]




                           THINGS TO REMEMBER
 Characteristics of Form or Habit That Will Determine to What Order or
                          Family Birds Belong.


                    ORDER 1. DIVING BIRDS—Pygopodes.

[Illustration: ORDER 1. DIVING BIRDS—Pygopodes.]

GREBES; Colymbidæ:—Form, duck-like; bill pointed and never flattened; no
tail; legs at extreme end of body; each flattened toe with an individual
web; wings small. Flies rapidly, but patters along the water before
taking wing. Expert divers, using wings as well as feet, to propel them,
under water.

LOONS. Family Gaviidæ:—Larger than Grebes; bill long, heavy, and
pointed; tail very short; feet webbed like a duck’s, but legs thin and
deep; form and habits, grebe-like.

AUKS, MURRES, PUFFINS. Family Alcidæ:—Bills very variable; tail short;
usually takes flight when alarmed, instead of diving as do grebes and
loons. With the exception of puffins, which stand on their feet, all
birds of this order sit upon their whole leg and tail. They are awkward
on land; some can hardly walk.


              ORDER 2. LONG-WINGED SWIMMERS.—Longipennes.

[Illustration: ORDER 2. LONG-WINGED SWIMMERS.—Longipennes.]

SKUAS, JAEGERS. Family Stercorariidæ:—Marine birds of prey; bill
strongly hooked, with long scaly shield, or cere, at the base; claws
strong and curved, hawk-like; flight hawk-like; plumage often entirely
sooty-black, and always so on the back.

GULLS, TERNS. Family Laridæ:—Gulls have hooked bills, usually yellowish,
yellow eyes and pale, webbed feet. Heap, underparts and square tail are
white in adults; back, pearl-grey; exceptions are the four small
black-headed gulls, which also have reddish legs. Gulls fly with the
bill straight in front, and often rest on the water. Terns have forked
tails, black caps, and their slender, pointed bills and small webbed
feet are usually red. They fly with bill pointed down, and dive upon
their prey.


                ORDER 3. TUBE-NOSED SWIMMERS.—Tubinares.

[Illustration: ORDER 3. TUBE-NOSED SWIMMERS.—Tubinares.]

FULMARS, SHEARWATERS, PETRELS. Family Procellariidæ:—Nostrils opening in
a tube on top of the hooked bill. Plumage of fulmars, gull-like;
shearwaters entirely sooty black, or white below; petrels blackish, with
white rumps,—very small birds. All seabirds.


              ORDER 4. TOTIPALMATE SWIMMERS.—Steganopodes.

[Illustration: ORDER 4. TOTIPALMATE SWIMMERS.—Steganopodes.]

All four toes joined by webs.

TROPIC BIRDS. Family Phaethontidæ:—Bill and form tern-like; middle tail
feathers very long.

GANNETS. Family Sulidæ:—Bill heavy and pointed; face and small throat
pouch, bare.

SKAKE-BIRDS. Family Anhingidæ:—Bill slender and pointed; neck and tail
very long, the latter rounded; habits like those of the following.

CORMORANTS. Family Phalacrocoracidæ:—Bill slender, but hooked at the
tip; plumage glossy black and brown; eyes green. They use their wings as
well as feet when pursuing fish under water.

PELICANS. Family Pelecanidæ:—Bill very long and with a large pouch
suspended below.

MAN-O’-WAR BIRDS. Family Fregatidæ:—very long and strongly hooked; tail
long and forked; wholly maritime, as are all but the preceding three.


               ORDER 5. DUCKS, GEESE AND SWANS. Anseres.

[Illustration: ORDER 5. DUCKS, GEESE AND SWANS. Anseres.]

Mergansers, with slender, toothed bills with which to catch the fish
they pursue under water.

Other ducks have rather broad bills, more or less resembling those of
the domestic duck. Their flight is rapid and direct. River ducks have no
web, or flap, on the hind toe; they get their food without going
entirely under water, by tipping up. Sea ducks have a broad flap on the
hind toe.


                   ORDER 6. FLAMINGOES. Odontoglossæ.

[Illustration: ORDER 6. FLAMINGOES. Odontoglossæ.]

Family Phoenicopteridæ:—Large, long-necked, pink birds with a crooked
box-like bill, long legs and webbed feet.


               ORDER 7. HERONS, IBISES, ETC. Herodiones.

[Illustration: ORDER 7. HERONS, IBISES, ETC. Herodiones.]

Long-legged, wading birds, with all four toes long, slender and without
webs. Usually found about the muddy edges of ponds, lakes or creeks, and
less often on the sea shore. Wings large and rounded.

SPOONBILL. Family Plataleidæ:—Bill long, thin and much broadened at the
end; head bare.

IBISES. Family Ibididæ:—Bill long, slender and curved down. Ibises and
Spoonbills fly with the neck fully extended.

STORKS. Family Ciconiidæ:—Bill long, heavy, and curved near the end;
head and upper neck bare.

HERONS, BITTERNS, EGRETS. Family Ardeidæ:—Bill long, straight and
pointed; head usually crested, and back often with plumes. Herons fly
with a fold in the neck, and the back of the head resting against the
shoulders.


                   ORDER 8. MARSH BIRDS. Paludicolæ.

[Illustration: ORDER 8. MARSH BIRDS. Paludicolæ.]

Birds of this order, vary greatly in size and appearance, but all agree
in having the hind toe elevated, whereas that of the members of the last
order leaves the foot on a level with the front toes; neck extended in
flight.

CRANES. Family Grudidæ:—Very large and heron-like, but with plumage
close feathered; top of head bare; bill long, slender and obtusely
pointed.

COURLANS. Family Aramidæ:—Size mid-way between the cranes and rails;
bill long and slender.

RAILS, ETC. Family Rallidæ:—Bills are variable, but toes and legs long;
wings short; flight slow and wavering; marsh skulkers, hiding in rushes.
Gallinules have a frontal shield on the forehead, Coots have
lobate-webbed feet, short, whitish bills.


                    ORDER 9. SHORE BIRDS. Limicolæ.

[Illustration: ORDER 9. SHORE BIRDS. Limicolæ.]

Comparatively small, long legged, slender-billed birds seen running
along edges of ponds or beaches.

PHALAROPES. Phalaropodidæ.—Toes with lobed webs.

AVOCETS, STILTS. Recurvirostridæ:—Avocet, with slender recurved bill,
and webbed feet; stilt, with straight bill, very long legs, toes not
webbed.

SNIPES, SANDPIPERS, ETC. Family Scolopacidæ:—Bills very variable but
slender, and all, except the Woodcock, with long pointed wings; flight
usually swift and erratic.

PLOVERS. Family Charadriidæ:—Bill short and stout; three toes.

TURNSTONES. Family Aphrizidæ:—Bill short, stout and slightly up-turned;
four toes.

OYSTER-CATCHERS. Family Hæmatopodidæ:—Bill long, heavy and compressed;
legs and toes stout; three toes slightly webbed at base.

JACANAS. Family Jacanidæ:—Bill with leaf-like shield at the base; legs
and toes extremely long and slender; sharp spur on wing.


                       ORDER 10. FOWLS. Gallinæ.

[Illustration: ORDER 10. FOWLS. Gallinæ.]

Ground birds of robust form; bill hen-like; wings short and rounded;
feet large and strong.

PARTRIDGES, GROUSE. Family Tetraonidæ:—Legs bare in the partridges,
feathered in grouse.

TURKEYS, PHEASANTS. Family Phasianidæ:—Legs often spurred, or head with
wattles, etc.

GUANS. Family Cracidæ:—Represented by the Chachalaca of Texas.


                 ORDER 11. PIGEONS AND DOVES. Columbæ.

[Illustration: ORDER 11. PIGEONS AND DOVES. Columbæ.]

Family Columbidæ:—Bill slender, hard at the tip, and with the nostrils
opening in a fleshy membrane at the base. Plumage soft grays and browns.


                   ORDER 12. BIRDS OF PREY. Raptores.

[Illustration: ORDER 12. BIRDS OF PREY. Raptores.]

VULTURES. Cathartidæ:—Head bare; feet hen-like.

HAWKS, EAGLES. Falconidæ:—Bill and claws strongly hooked; nostrils in a
cere at base of bill.

BARN OWLS. Aluconidæ:—Black eyes in triangular facial disc; middle
toe-nail serrated.

HORNED OWLS, ETC. Bubonidæ:—Facial disc round; some species with ears,
others without.




                               BIRD GUIDE


                                 PART 1

               Water Birds, Game Birds and Birds of Prey

[Illustration: ]


                      DIVING BIRDS—Order Pygopodes
                        GREBES—Family Colymbidæ


                             WESTERN GREBE
         1.     Æchmophorus occidentalis.     25 to 29 inches.

All grebes have lobate-webbed feet, that is each toe has its individual
web, being joined to its fellow only for a short distance at the base.

This, the largest of our grebes, is frequently known as the “Swan Grebe”
because of its extremely long, thin neck. In summer the back of the neck
is black, but in winter it is gray like the back.

Notes.—Loud, quavering and cackling.

Nest.—A floating mass of decayed rushes, sometimes attached to upright
stalks. The 2 to 5 eggs are pale, bluish white, usually stained (2.40 ×
1.55). They breed in colonies.

Range.—Western North America, from the Dakotas and Manitoba to the
Pacific, and north to southern Alaska. Winters in the Pacific coast
states and Mexico.

[Illustration: ]


                             HOLBŒLL GREBE
                2.     Colymbus holbœlli.     19 inches.

This is next to the Western Grebe in size, both being much larger than
any of our others. In summer, they are very handsomely marked with a
reddish brown neck, silvery white cheeks and throat, and black crown and
crest, but in winter they take on the usual grebe dress of grayish above
and glossy white below. Because of their silky appearance and firm
texture, grebe breasts of all kinds have been extensively used in the
past to adorn hats of women, who were either heedless or ignorant of the
wholesale slaughter that was carried on that they might obtain them.

Nest.—Of decayed rushes like that of the last. Not in as large colonies;
more often single pairs will be found nesting with other varieties.
Their eggs average smaller than those of the last species (2.35 × 1.25).

Range.—North America, breeding most abundantly in the interior of
Canada, and to some extent in the Dakotas. Winters in the U. S., chiefly
on the coasts.

[Illustration: ]


                              HORNED GREBE
                3.     Colymbus auritus.     14 inches.

As is usual with grebes, summer brings a remarkable change in the dress
of these birds. The black, puffy head is adorned with a pair of buffy
white ear tufts and the foreneck is a rich chestnut color. In winter,
they are plain gray and white but the secondaries are always largely
white, as they are in the two preceding and the following species. The
grebe diet consists almost wholly of small fish, which they are very
expert at pursuing and catching under water. One that I kept in
captivity in a large tank, for a few weeks, would never miss catching
the shiners, upon which he was fed, at the first lightning-like dart of
his slender neck. They also eat quantities of shell fish, and I doubt if
they will refuse any kind of flesh, for they always have a keen
appetite.

Nest.—A slovenly built pile of vegetation floating in the “sloughs” of
western prairies. The 3 to 7 eggs are usually stained brownish yellow
(1.70 × 1.15).

Range.—Breeds from Northern Illinois and So. Dakota northward; winters
from northern U. S. to the Gulf of Mexico.

[Illustration: ]


                          AMERICAN EARED GREBE
        4.     Colymbus nigricollis californicus.     13 inches.

This is a western species rarely found east of the Mississippi. In
summer, it differs from the last in having the entire neck black; in
winter it can always be distinguished from the Horned Grebe by its
slightly upcurved bill, while the upper mandible of the last is convex.
In powers of swimming and diving, grebes are not surpassed by any of our
water birds. They dive at the flash of a gun and swim long distances
before coming to the surface; on this account they are often called
“devil divers.” They fly swiftly when once a-wing, but their concave
wings are so small that they have to patter over the water with their
feet in order to rise.

Nest.—They nest in colonies, often in the same sloughs with Horned and
Western Grebes, laying their eggs early in June. The 4 to 7 eggs are
dull white, usually stained brownish, and cannot be separated from those
of the last.

Range.—Western N. A., breeding from Texas to Manitoba and British
Columbia; winters in western U. S. and Mexico.

[Illustration: ]


                       LEAST OR ST. DOMINGO GREBE
         5.     Colymbus dominions brachypterus.     10 inches.

This is much smaller than any others of our grebes; in breeding plumage
it most nearly resembles the following species, but the bill is black
and sharply pointed. It has a black patch on the throat, and the crown
and back of the head are glossy blue black; in winter, the throat and
sides of the head are white.

Nest.—Not different from those of the other grebes. Only comparatively
few of them breed in the U. S. but they are common in Mexico and Central
America. Their eggs, when first laid, are a pale, chalky, greenish
white, but they soon become discolored and stained so that they are a
deep brownish, more so than any of the others; from 3 to 6 eggs is a
full complement (1.40 × .95).

Range.—Found in the United States, only in the Lower Rio Grande Valley
in Southern Texas, and southwards to northern South America.

[Illustration: ]


                           PIED-BILLED GREBE
              6.     Podilymbus podiceps.     13.5 inches.

In any plumage this species cannot be mistaken for others, because of
its stout compressed bill and brown iris; all the others have red eyes.
In summer the bill is whitish with a black band encircling it; the
throat is black; the eye encircled by a whitish ring; the breast and
sides are brownish-gray. In winter they are brownish-black above and
dull white below, with the breast and sides washed with brown. Young
birds have more or less distinct whitish stripes on the head.

Notes.—A loud, ringing “kow-kow-kow-kow (repeated many times and ending
in) kow-uh, kow-uh.”

Nest.—Of decayed rushes floating in reed-grown ponds or edges of lakes.
The pile is slightly hollowed and, in this, the 5 to 8 eggs are laid;
the bottom of the nest is always wet and the eggs are often partly in
the water; they are usually covered with a wet mass when the bird is
away. Brownish-white (1.70 × 1.15).

Range.—Whole of N. A., breeding locally and usually in pairs or small
colonies.

[Illustration: ]


                          LOONS—Family Gavidæ


                       LOON; GREAT NORTHERN DIVER
                7.     Gavia immer.     31 to 35 inches.

In form, loons resemble large grebes, but their feet are full webbed
like those of a duck; they have short, stiff tails and long, heavy,
pointed bills. They have no tufts or ruffs in breeding season, but their
plumage changes greatly. The common loon is very beautifully and
strikingly marked with black and white above, and white below; the head
is black, with a crescent across the throat and a ring around the neck.
In winter, they are plain gray above and white below.

Loons are fully as expert in diving and swimming as are the grebes. They
are usually found in larger, more open bodies of water.

Notes.—A loud, quavering, drawn-out “wah-hoo-o-o.”

Nest.—Sometimes built of sticks, and sometimes simply a hollow in the
sand or bank under overhanging bushes, usually on an island. The 2 eggs
are brownish with a few black specks (3.50 × 2.25).

Range.—N. A., breeding from northern U. S. northwards; winters from
northern U. S. southwards.

[Illustration: ]


                          BLACK-THROATED LOON
                  9.     Gavia arctica.     28 inches.

This loon lives in the Arctic regions and only rarely is found, in
winter, in Northern United States. In summer, it can readily be
distinguished from the common loon by the gray crown and hind-neck, as
well as by different arrangement of the black and white markings. In
winter, they are quite similar to the last species but can be recognized
by their smaller size, and can be distinguished from the winter plumaged
Red-throated Loon by the absence of any white markings on the back. Like
the grebes, loons have to run over the surface of the water in order to
take flight, and they are practically helpless when on land. Their
flight is very rapid, in a straight line, and their neck is carried at
full length in front. This species has red eyes, as do all the other
loons.

Nest.—The same as the last species, but the two eggs have more of an
olive tint and are smaller (3.10 × 2.00).

Range.—Arctic America, wintering in Canada and occasionally in Northern
United States.

[Illustration: ]


                           RED-THROATED LOON
                 11.     Gavia stellata.     25 inches.

Besides being smaller than the common loon, this species has a more
slender bill, which has a slightly up-turned appearance owing to the
straight top to the upper mandible; in summer, its back and head are
gray, with no white spots, although the back of the head has a few white
streaks; there is a large patch of chestnut on the fore-neck; the under
parts are white. In winter, it is gray above and white below, but the
back is sprinkled with small white spots; at this season it can easily
be distinguished from Holbœll Grebe by the absence of any white patch in
the wings as well as by the differently shaped feet.

Nest.—A depression in the sand or ground, not more than a foot or two
from the water’s edge, so they can slide from their two eggs into their
natural element. The eggs, which are laid in June, are olive-brown,
specked with black (2.90 × 1.75).

Range.—Breeds from New Brunswick and Manitoba north to the Arctic Ocean;
winters throughout the United States.

[Illustration: ]


                 AUKS, MURRES and PUFFINS—Family Alcidæ


                           PUFFIN; SEA PARROT
               13.     Fratercula arctica.     13 inches.

Puffins are grotesque birds, with short legs, stout bodies and very
large, thin bills, that of the common Puffin being 2 in. in length and
about the same in height; the bill is highly colored with red and
yellow, and the feet are red; eyes, white. It will be noticed that the
blackish band across the throat does not touch the chin, this
distinguishing it from the Horned Puffin of the Pacific coast. Adults in
winter shed the greater portion of their bill, lose the little horns
that project over the eye, and the face is blackish; they then resemble
young birds. They live on rocky shores, the more precipitous the better.
They stand erect upon their feet and walk with ease.

Notes.—A low croak.

Nest.—They breed in large colonies on rocky cliffs, laying their single
white eggs (2.50 × 1.75) in crevices.

Range.—Breeds from Matinicus Rock, Me., northward; winters south
casually to Cape Cod. Large-billed Puffin (F. a. naumanni) is found in
the Arctic Ocean.

[Illustration: ]


                      BLACK GUILLEMOT; SEA PIGEON
                 27.     Cepphus grylle.     13 inches.

These birds are very abundant about the rocky islands from Maine
northward. They may be seen sitting in rows on the edges of the rocks,
or pattering along the water as they rise in flight, from its surface,
at a boat’s approach. In summer the plumage is entirely black, except
the large white patches on the wings; legs red; eyes brown. This species
has the bases of the greater coverts black, while they are white in
Mandt Guillemot (C. mandtii—No. 28), which is found from Labrador
northward. In winter, these birds are mottled gray and white above, and
white below, but the patches still show.

Notes.—A shrill, piercing, squealing whistle.

Nest.—Guillemots lay two eggs upon the bare rock or gravel in crevices
or under piles of boulders where they are difficult to get at. They are
grayish or greenish-white, beautifully and heavily blotched with black
and brownish (2.40 × 1.60).

Range.—Breeds on coasts of North Atlantic from Maine northward; winters
south to Long Island.

[Illustration: ]


                                 MURRE
                  30.     Uria troille.     16 inches.

In summer the throat is brownish black, but in winter the throat and
sides of head are white; feet blackish bill, long and stout, 1.7 in.
long, while that of Brunnich Murre (Uria lomvia—No. 31), is shorter
(1.25 in.) and more swollen. The ranges and habits of the two species
are the same. Murres are very gregarious, nesting in large colonies on
northern cliffs. In summer every ledge available at their nesting resort
is lined with these birds, sitting upright on their single eggs.

Notes.—A hoarse imitation of their name “murre.”

Nest.—Their single eggs are laid upon the bare ledges of cliffs. They
are pear-shaped to prevent their rolling off when the bird leaves;
greenish, gray or white in color, handsomely blotched or lined with
blackish (3.40 × 2.00). Their eggs present a greater diversity of
coloration and marking than those of any other bird.

Range.—Breeds from the Magdalen Is. northward; winters south to Long
Island.

[Illustration: ]


                            RAZOR-BILLED AUK
                  32.     Alca torda.     16.5 inches.

Similar in size and form to the murre, but with a short, deep, thin
black bill, crossed by a white line. In summer, with a white line from
the eye to top of bill, and with a brownish black throat; in winter,
without the white line and with the throat and sides of head white. They
nest and live in large colonies, usually in company with murres. Their
food, like that of the murres, puffins and guillemots is of fish and
shell fish, or marine worms. They get these from the rockweed along the
shores or by diving; they are good swimmers, using both their feet and
wings to propel them through the water, the same as do the grebes and
loons.

Notes.—A hoarse grunt or groan (Chapman).

Nest.—Their single eggs are laid on ledges of cliffs; they are not
nearly as pointed at the smaller end, as murre eggs, and are always
grayish white in color, marked with blackish blotches (3.1 × 2.00).

Range.—Breeds from the Magdalen Islands northward; winters south to Long
Island.

[Illustration: ]


                               GREAT AUK
                33.     Plautus impennis.     29 inches.

This largest of the auks lived, as far as we have authentic record,
until 1844, when it became extinct, largely through the agency of man.
Although nearly twice as long a bird as the Razor-billed Auk, their
wings were shorter than those of that bird, being only a trifle longer
than those of the little Dovekie; they were flightless, but the wings
were used to good advantage in swimming. Being in the direct line of
travel between the old world and the new, sailors, on passing vessels,
killed countless numbers of them for food, and in some cases merely for
the love of slaughter. They lived on coasts and islands of the Atlantic
from Mass., northwards. There are about seventy mounted birds preserved,
of which five or six, as well as some skeletons, are in this country.

Their eggs resemble those of the Razor-bill but, of course, are much
larger (5.00 × 3.00). About 70 of these are in existence, six being in
this country (Washington, Phila., and four recently purchased by John E.
Thayer, of Lancaster, Mass.).

[Illustration: ]


                           DOVEKIE; SEA DOVE
                    34.     Alle alle.     8 inches.

These little auks, called “ice birds” by the fishermen, are very
abundant in the far north. In summer, they have a blackish brown throat
and breast, but they are never seen in the United States or southern
parts of the British possessions in that plumage. In winter, their
throats and sides of the head are white as well as the rest of their
upper parts. At all seasons the edges of the scapulars and tips of the
secondaries are white, as are usually spots on each eyelid. Even in
winter, they are only casually found on our coast, for they keep well
out at sea. Occasionally they are blown inland by storms and found with
their feet frozen fast in the ice of some of our ponds or lakes.

Nest.—They lay single pale greenish blue eggs, placing them in crevices
of sea cliffs; size 1.80 × 1.25.

Range.—Breeds on islands in the Arctic Ocean and on the coasts of
Northern Greenland; winters south to Long Island and casually farther.

[Illustration: ]


                 LONG-WINGED SWIMMERS—Order Longipennes
                 SKUAS AND JÆGERS—Family Stercorariidæ


                                  SKUA
                35.     Megalestris skua.     22 inches.

These large birds are the most powerful and audacious pirates among the
sea fowl of northern waters. Their whole form is indicative of strength;
form robust, feet strong, and bill large, powerful and hooked. Their
plumage is of a nearly uniform blackish-brown, with white shafts to the
wing feathers and a white patch at the base of the primaries.

Nest.—They do not nest in large colonies, only a single or a few pairs
breeding in the same locality. Their nests are hollows in the ground, a
short distance back from the rocky shores. The two eggs that they lay
are olive brown, spotted with blackish (2.75 × 1.90).

Range.—North Atlantic coasts, chiefly on the Old World side, breeding
from the Shetland Islands and possibly Greenland, northwards. They are
only rarely found on our coasts even in winter, but have been taken as
far south as New York.

[Illustration: ]


                            POMARINE JAEGER
             36.     Stercorarius pomarinus.     21 inches.

Jaegers are more slender in form than the Skuas, but like them are
piratical in their habits, preying chiefly upon terns. Off Chatham,
Mass., I have often watched them in pursuit of the graceful terns, but,
excellent fliers as the latter birds are, they were always overtaken and
forced to drop the fish that they carried, and the jaeger would rarely
miss catching it as it fell. This species has two color phases
independent of sex or age. In the light plumage the top of the head is
black; rest of the upper parts and the under tail coverts brownish
black; underparts and bases of primaries, white. Dark phase,—Entirely
blackish brown except the white shafts to wing feathers and bases Of
primaries. In any plumage they can be distinguished from the other
species by the rounded, lengthened central tail feathers.

Nest.—A hollow in the ground in marshy places. The two eggs are olive
brown spotted with black.

Range.—Northern hemisphere, breeding north of the Arctic Circle; winter
from Mass. southward.

[Illustration: ]


                            PARASITIC JAEGER
              37.     Stercorarius parasiticus.     17 in.

Two phases of color, both similar to those of the last, but the central
pair of tail feathers are pointed and project about 4 in. beyond the
others; bill 1.4 in. long, with the nostril nearest the end. All jaegers
have grayish blue legs with black feet, and brown eyes. They are called
“Jiddy hawks” by fishermen, who often feed them fish liver. Their flight
is like that of a hawk. The nesting habits and range are the same as the
next.


                           LONG-TAILED JAEGER
              38.     Stercorarius longicaudus.     21 in.

Like the last species, but with the pointed central tail feathers
projecting 8 or 10 in. and with a shorter bill (1.15 in.) and the
nostril about midway of its length. It is less often found in the dark
phase.

Notes.—Shrill wailing whistles.

Nest.—Nest and eggs like those of the Pomarine Jaeger.

Range.—Arctic regions, wintering south to Florida.

[Illustration: ]


                     GULLS AND TERNS—Family Laridæ


                               IVORY GULL
                   39.     Pagophila alba.     17 in.

Entirely pure white with the shafts of the primaries yellowish; bill
dark at base and yellow at tip; eyes brown, surrounded by a narrow red
ring; feet black. Young birds are spotted with brown on the head, tips
of wing and tail. This beautiful “Snow Gull,” as it is called by
whalers, is abundant at its breeding ground in the Arctic regions, but
is rarely seen as far south as the United States. It breeds the farthest
north of any of the gulls except Ross Gull.

Nest.—Of grasses and seaweed, usually on ledges of cliffs, but
occasionally on the ground farther inland. The three eggs, laid in June,
are grayish-buff, marked with brown and black (2.30 × 1.70).

Range.—Breeds only north of the Arctic Circle, and winters south to New
Brunswick and British Columbia; casually to Long Island and the Great
Lakes.

[Illustration: ]


                               KITTIWAKE
                  40.     Rissa tridactyla.     16 in.

In summer, with plumage white, except the gray back and wings, and solid
black tips to the primaries; in winter, the sides and back of the head
are washed with the color of the back; young birds are like winter
adults but have a dusky spot back of the eye; feet blackish, bill yellow
in adults and black in young birds. Kittiwakes are very abundant in
their northern breeding ground, and are common off the New England coast
in winter. They usually keep well out at sea, often hovering around
fishing boats to pick up refuse that is thrown overboard. They can
easily be identified by their small size, the distinct black tip to the
wings and their black feet.

Notes.—“Keet-a-wake, keet-a-wake.”

Nest.—A pile of small sticks, grass and weeds, placed on ledges of sea
cliffs. The 3 or 4 eggs are olive gray, with black markings (2.20 ×
1.70).

Range.—Breeds from the Gulf of St. Lawrence north to the Arctic Circle;
winters south to Long Island and casually farther.

[Illustration: ]


                              GLAUCUS GULL
                 42.     Larus hyperboreus.     28 in.

Plumage white with a pearl gray mantle; no black in the plumage, the
primaries being white or grayish; bill and eye yellow, the former with a
red spot at the end of the lower mandible; feet flesh color. In winter,
the head is slightly streaked with brownish. Young birds are mottled
grayish brown and white, of varying shades, but always lighter than the
young of the Herring Gull. Some specimens are very beautiful, being
entirely white, with a few spots of brownish on the back, resembling the
markings of a light-colored Snowy Owl. This species is one of the
largest and most powerful of the gull family, only surpassed by the
Great Black-backed Gull.

Nest.—Usually a bulky structure of grasses, seaweed and moss placed on
the ground; the two or three eggs are brownish gray with brown and black
spots (3. × 2.20).

Range.—Breeds from Labrador and Hudson Bay northward; winters south to
New England, the Great Lakes and Calif.

[Illustration: ]


                              ICELAND GULL
                 43.     Larus leucopterus.     25 in.

Plumage exactly like that of the Glaucus Gull but the birds are smaller
and are found farther north.

Range.—Breeds in Greenland and winters south to Northern New England and
the Great Lakes.


                              KUMLIEN GULL
                   45.     Larus kumlieni.     27 in.

Plumage very similar to that of the Iceland and Glaucus Gulls, but with
the primaries conspicuously gray, with white tips. As usual with the
gull family, this species feeds largely, during the nesting season upon
eggs and young of other sea birds. They seem to have a special liking
for Cormorant eggs, and these ungainly creatures have to sit on their
nests very closely to prevent being robbed.

Range.—Breeds about the mouth of Hudson Bay; winters south to Long
Island.

[Illustration: ]


                        GREAT BLACK-BACKED GULL
                   47.     Larus marinas.     29 in.

Largest and most powerful of our gulls. Adults in summer have the head,
tail and underparts white, back slaty black, eyes and bill yellow, with
a red spot near the tip of the lower mandible; feet flesh color;
primaries tipped with white. In winter, the head is streaked with dusky.
Young birds are mottled with dusky brown above, and streaked with the
same below. These birds are very rapacious, and besides feeding upon
refuse, fish and shellfish, devour, during the summer season, a great
many eggs and young of other sea birds; this habit is common to nearly
all the larger gulls.

Notes.—A laughing “ha-ha” and a harsh “keouw.”

Nest.—Either hollows on the ground or masses of weeds and drift,
hollowed out to receive the three grayish brown eggs, spotted with
blackish and lilac (3. × 2.15).

Range.—These gulls breed from Newfoundland northward, being most
abundant on the Labrador coast. In winter they are found as far south as
the Carolinas, usually in company with Herring Gulls.

[Illustration: ]


                              HERRING GULL
                  51.     Larus argentatus.     24 in.

Adults in summer, white, with gray mantle, and black primaries tipped
with white. In winter, the head and neck are streaked below with grayish
brown. Bills of adults, yellow with red spot on lower mandible; eye
yellow; feet flesh color; bill of young, flesh color with a blackish
tip. These are the most abundant of the larger gulls and the best known
because of their southerly distribution. Several of the smaller Maine
islands have colonies of thousands of birds each, and in winter great
numbers of them are seen in all the harbors along our seacoast. Young
gulls are born covered with down, and can run swiftly and swim well.

Notes.—“Cack-cack-cack” and very noisy squawkings when disturbed at
their breeding grounds.

Nest.—A hollow in the ground, or a heap of weeds and trash. The three
eggs are olive-gray, spotted with black (2.8 × 1.7).

Range.—Breeds from Maine, the Great Lakes and Dakotas northward; winters
south to the Gulf of Mexico.

[Illustration: ]


                            RING-BILLED GULL
                 54.     Larus delawarensis.     18 in.

Adults in summer.—White with pearl gray mantle; ends of outer primaries
black with white tips; eye yellow; feet and bill greenish-yellow, the
latter crossed by a black band near the tip. In winter, the head and
neck are streaked with grayish. Young birds are mottled brownish-gray
above, and the tail has a band of blackish near the end.

The adults can be distinguished from the Kittiwakes, which most closely
resemble them, by the yellowish feet and white tips to the black
primaries.

Nest.—In hollows in the ground, usually in grass. The two or three eggs
are gray or brownish gray, strongly marked with black (2.80 × 1.75).
They breed in large colonies, often in company with other gulls and
terns.

Range.—Whole or North America, breeding from Newfoundland, Dakota and
British Columbia northwards, most abundantly in the interior; winters
from Northern United States southward.

[Illustration: ]


                             LAUGHING GULL
                  58.     Larus atricilla.     16 in.

Largest of the black-headed gulls. Bill and feet carmine-red; primaries
wholly black or only with slight white tips; eye brown; in breeding
season, with the underparts tinged with pinkish. In winter, without the
black hood, the head being tinged with grayish, and the bill and feet
dusky. Young birds are like winter adults with the back more or less
mixed with brownish and the tail crossed by a black band. The most
southerly distributed of our eastern gulls, its northern breeding place
being on the southern shore of Mass.

Notes.—Strange cackling laughter; hence their name.

Nest.—Heaps of rubbish and weeds on the ground in wet marshes. The 3 to
5 eggs are gray or olive-gray with black spots (2.25 × 1.60).

Range.—Breeds from the Gulf of Mexico north to Mass., and in the
interior to Ohio, but most abundantly on the South Atlantic coast.
Winters from the Carolinas to Northern South America.

[Illustration: ]


                             FRANKLIN GULL
                  59.     Larus franklini.     15 in.

Adult in summer.—Hood dark; mantle lighter than the last species;
primaries gray with black ends broadly tipped with white; underparts
rosy; bill and feet red, the former dark toward the tip, and more
slender than that of the Laughing Gull. In winter, the plumage changes
the same as that of the last but the color of the primaries and the
shape of the bill will always identify this species. These gulls are
strictly birds of the interior, nesting on low marshy islands in ponds
or sloughs, often in company with grebes, upon whose eggs they subsist
to a great extent.

Notes.—Similar to those of the last species.

Nest.—A mass of weeds, etc., on the ground in marshes, often partly
floating in the water. The eggs are similar to those of the Laughing
Gull but the markings are usually in the form of zigzag lines as well as
spots (2.25 × 1.60).

Range.—Interior of North America, breeding from Iowa and the Dakotas
north to Middle Canada; winters from the Gulf States southward.

[Illustration: ]


                             BONAPARTE GULL
                 60.     Larus philadelphia.     14 in.

Adult in summer.—Hood lighter gray and not as extensive as in the last
two species; bill slender and black; feet coral red; primaries white
with black tips and outer web of first one; mantle paler than either of
the last. In winter, the head is white with gray spots back of the eyes.
Young birds have the back mixed with brownish and the tail with a band
of black near the tip, but the bill and primaries always separate this
species in any plumage from the other black-headed gulls. These little
gulls are one of the most beautiful and graceful of the family, but they
are rarely found in the U. S. with the dark hood.

Nest.—Of weeds and grass on the ground, but not in the watery situations
chosen by the preceding species. The three eggs are olive-brown, marked
with blackish (1.90 × 1.30).

Range.—Breeds in the interior from Hudson Bay and Northern Manitoba
northward. Winters from Maine, the Great Lakes and British Columbia
southward.

[Illustration: ]


                      ROSS GULL; WEDGE-TAILED GULL
                 61.     Rhodostethia rosea.     13 in.

Bill short and slender; tail wedge-shaped. Adults in summer.—With no
hood, but with narrow black collar; mantle light pearl; primaries wholly
white with the exception of a blackish outer web to the first one; feet
coral red, and underparts tinged with rosy in the nesting season. In
winter, with no black collar nor pink underparts, and with blackish spot
before the eye. Young mixed with blackish above, and with a black band
across the tip of the tail; feet black; easily distinguished, when in
the hand, by the very small bill, and the wedge shaped tail. This gull
has the most northern distribution of any known bird, except, possibly,
the Knot. Its breeding grounds were first reported by Nansen in 1896, in
Franz Josef Land. It is one of the rarest birds in collections.

Range.—Polar regions, south in winter to Point Barrow, Alaska, and Disco
Bay, Greenland.

[Illustration: ]


                              SABINE GULL
                    62.     Xema sabini.     14 in.

Tail slightly forked; bill small and black, tipped with yellow. Adults
in summer.—Head with a slaty-gray hood, edged with a black ring around
the neck; outer primaries black, with white tips, and edge of shoulder
black; feet blackish; eye ring orange red. In winter, without the hood
or collar, but the head is tinged with gray on the ears and nape. Young
birds most nearly resemble those of the Bonaparte Gull, but the
primaries are blackish, and the tail slightly forked. This species is
very abundant within the Arctic Circle, but is not as boreal as the
last.

Nest.—In depressions in the ground, usually lined with grass; the three
eggs are olive-brown, marked with deeper brown and black (1.75 × 1.25).

Range.—Breeds from northern Alaska and the islands about the mouth of
Hudson Bay northwards; winters south on the Atlantic coast to Maine and
rarely New York.

[Illustration: ]


                            GULL-BILLED TERN
               63.     Gelochelidon nilotica.     14 in.

Differs from all other terns in the shape of its black bill, which is
stout, but with the upper mandible not hooked nor curved, as in the
gulls. Tail forked about 1.5 in. Adults have the crown black in summer,
while in winter the head is white, with the nape and spot in front of
eye, black mixed with white. Young birds are similar to winter adults
but have the back feathers margined with brownish, and the neck streaked
with gray. This species is found only on our South Atlantic and Gulf
coasts, and is not abundant anywhere.

Notes.—A high, thin, somewhat reedy “tee-tee-tee,” sometimes suggesting
a weak voiced katydid (Chapman).

Nest.—A slight, unlined depression in the short marsh grass or on the
beaches. The three eggs are olive gray, spotted with black and brown
(1.80 × 1.30).

Range.—Breeds in Texas and along the Gulf and South Atlantic coasts to
Virginia; later, may wander north to New England; winters south of the
U. S.

[Illustration: ]


                              CASPIAN TERN
                   64.     Sterna caspia.     21 in.

Largest of our terns. Bill heavy and bright red; head crested; tail
forked about 1.5 in.; eyes brown. Adults in summer have the crown and
occipital crest glossy black. Winter adults and young birds have the
crown mixed with white, and the latter are also blotched with blackish
on wings and tail.

Nest.—The 2 or 3 buffy, spotted eggs are laid in hollows in the sand.
Size 2.60 × 1.75.

Range.—Breeds locally along the South Atlantic coast and in the interior
to Great Slave Lake.


                               ROYAL TERN
                   65.     Sterna maxima.     19 in.

Similar to the last, but smaller; bill more slender; tail forked 3.5 in.

Nest.—A hollow in the sand. The 2 or 3 eggs are creamy buff, with
distinct blackish-brown spots (2.60 × 1.70).

Range.—Breeds in the Gulf States and north to Virginia and Calif.;
winters south of the U. S.

[Illustration: ]


                               CABOT TERN
           67.     Sterna sandvicensis acuflavida.     16 in.

Head crested; bill and feet blackish, the former with a yellow tip.
Adults have the crown glossy black. Young birds, and winter adults, have
the crown mixed with white, and the former have blackish markings on the
wings; tail forked 2.75 in. Like the majority of terns, these breed in
immense colonies.

Nest.—Their two or three eggs are deposited in slight hollows in the
sand. They are cream colored, boldly spotted with blackish brown (2.10 ×
1.40).

Range.—Breeds on the Florida Keys, Bahamas and the West Indies; later
may stray north as far as New England; winters south of the United
States.


                              TRUDEAU TERN
                  69.     Sterna trudeaui.     14 in.

This is a rare South American species, described by Audubon as having
occurred in New Jersey and New York. It has the form of the Forster
Tern, a bright yellow bill and no black crown, but a black line through
the eye to the ears.

[Illustration: ]


                              FORSTER TERN
                  69.     Sterna forsteri.     15 in.

No crest on this or any of the following terns. Tail forked 4 in.; below
pure white. In summer, with bill and feet orange red; crown black. In
winter, the crown is white, but there is a blackish patch about the
eyes, and the bill and feet are dark. These beautiful birds are often
known as “Sea Swallows,” because of their similarity in form and flight
to those well known land birds. They are the embodiment of grace as they
dart about high in the air, bill pointed downward, alert and ready to
dart down upon any small fish or eel that may attract their fancy. They
usually get their food by plunging.

Notes.—A sharp, twanging “cack.”

Nest.—A hollow in the ground, in which the 3 eggs are laid in June. Eggs
whitish, greenish or brownish, variously marked with brown, black and
lavender (1.80 × 1.30).

Range.—Breeds in the interior, north to Manitoba, and on the coasts to
Virginia and Calif. Winters from the Gulf States southward.

[Illustration: ]


                              COMMON TERN
                   70.     Sterna hirundo.     15 in.

Mantle darker than that of any of the similar terns; washed with grayish
below; bill and feet bright red, the former shading to black on the tip;
tail less deeply forked (3.1 in.); edge of outer primaries and outer
tail feathers, blackish. Changes in winter correspond to those of the
last. Young birds have the feathers on the back margined with brownish.

Note.—An energetic “tee-arr, tee-arr.”

Nest.—The three eggs are laid in a slight hollow on the sandy beach.

Range.—Breeds locally from the Gulf States to Greenland and Hudson Bay;
winters south of the U. S.


                              ARCTIC TERN
                 71.     Sterna paradisæa.     15.5 in.

Similar to the Common Tern, but tail longer (forked 4.5 in.) and bill
wholly red. In winter, bill and feet dark, as are those of the others.

Range.—Breeds from Mass. northwards; winters in the south.

[Illustration: ]


                              ROSEATE TERN
                 72.     Sterna dougalli.     15.5 in.

This species is the most gracefully formed of the terns. The tail is 7.5
in. long, forked to a depth of 5.25 in. In summer, the bill is blackish,
changing to red only at the base. The underparts are a beautiful rosy
tint in the breeding season; tail entirely white; feet red. In winter
the usual changes occur, and young birds have dusky edges to the
feathers of the back and wings. Terns are now becoming more abundant on
our coast, their slaughter and persecution for millinery purposes
fortunately having been stopped in time to prevent their extinction.

They feed chiefly upon small fish and marine insects, and often gather
about fishing boats, waiting for an opportunity to dive after any bit
that may be thrown overboard.

Notes.—A harsh “cack” and “tee-arr,” like that of the common Tern.

Nest.—Eggs like those of the similar terns.

Range.—Breeds on the Atlantic coast north to Mass.; winters south of the
U. S.

[Illustration: ]


                               LEAST TERN
                  74.     Sterna antillarum.     9 in.

Smallest of our terns. Adult in summer.—Crown, nape, and line through
the eye, black; forehead and line above the eye, white; bill and feet
yellow, the former black at the tip. In winter, the crown is white, the
blackish being restricted to the nape and about the eyes.

These pretty little sea swallows were abundant both on the coast and in
the interior but are yearly becoming more scarce especially on the
Atlantic coast. They are very aggressive when anyone approaches their
nesting grounds and will continually dash down at you as they utter
their sharp cries of disapproval.

Notes.—A sharp, metallic clattering “cheep, cheep.”

Nest.—Two or three eggs are laid upon the bare sand. They are
buffy-gray, sharply specked with blackish (1.25 × .95).

Range.—Breeds north to Mass., the Great Lakes and Calif.; winters south
of the United States.

[Illustration: ]


                               SOOTY TERN
                   75.     Sterna fuscata.     17 in.

Adult in summer.—Above sooty-black, except the white outer tail
feathers. Crown, line through the eye, bill and feet, black; forehead
and underparts white; eye red. Young birds are smoky slate color all
over, with the tail feathers, and some on the back and breast, tipped
with whitish. This is the “egg bird” of tropical countries, thousands of
their eggs being taken for food.

Note.—A nasal “ker-wacky-wak” (Chapman).

Nest.—A single egg deposited in a hollow in the sand; it is
creamy-white, spotted with blackish-brown.

Range.—Tropical countries; breeds north to the Florida Keys and islands
in the Gulf of Mexico; sometimes wanders north to New England.


                              BRIDLED TERN
                  76.     Sterna anætheta.     15 in.

Similar to the last, but the back and wings much lighter, and the white
of the forehead extends over the eyes; nape whitish.

Range.—Breeds north to the Bahamas.

[Illustration: ]


                               BLACK TERN
          77.     Hydrochelidon nigra surinamensis.     10 in.

Adults in summer with the head, neck and underparts, black; back, wings
and tail, dark gray; eyes brown. In winter, the forehead, neck and
underparts are white; nape and patch back of eye blackish.

In summer these little terns are found only in the interior, where they
nest about marshy ponds. They are very pugnacious and will sometimes
touch an intruder with their wings as they dart past. As usual with the
family, they nest in colonies.

Notes.—A sharp “peek.” (Chapman).

Nest.—A pile of weeds and trash in sloughs on the prairies, or about the
edges of marshy lakes, the nests often being surrounded by, and partly
floating in the water. The three eggs are very dark colored, having an
olive-brown or greenish background, blotched with black (1.35 × .95).

Range.—Breeds in the interior from middle U. S. north to Alaska and
Hudson Bay; winters south of the U. S., migrating along the Atlantic
coast as well as in the interior.

[Illustration: ]


                                 NODDY
                   79.     Anous stolidus.     15 in.

Adults with the crown silvery-white, the rest of the plumage being
sooty-brown; the bill, feet and line to the eye are black. The plumage
of these beautiful birds is very soft and pleasing to the eye. They look
to be gentle and confiding, and a closer acquaintance shows that they
are. They will frequently allow themselves to be touched with the hand
before they leave their nests. They are abundant in some of the Bahaman
and West Indian Islands, where they nest in company with other species.

Notes.—A hoarse reedy “cack” increasing to a guttural “k-r-r-r-r-r-r-r.”
(Chapman).

Nest.—Of sticks and grasses, placed at low elevations in the tops of
trees and bushes, or upon the ground. The single egg that they lay is
buffy, spotted with black and brown (2.00 × 1.30).

Range.—Breeds north to the Bahamas and on Bird Key near Key West; rarely
wanders on the Atlantic coast to South Carolina.

[Illustration: ]


                       SKIMMERS—Family Rynchopidæ


                             BLACK SKIMMER
                   80.     Rynchops nigra.     18 in.

These strange birds are not apt to be mistaken for any other. They are
locally abundant on the South Atlantic coast as far north as Virginia.
Their flight is swift and more direct than that of terns; they fly in
compact flocks, in long sweeps over the water, feeding by dropping their
long, thin mandible beneath the surface and gathering in everything
edible that comes in their path.

Notes.—Baying like a pack of hounds.

Nest.—Their 3 or 4 eggs are deposited in hollows in the sandy beaches.
They are creamy-white, beautifully marked with blackish-brown and gray
(1.75 × 1.30).

Range.—Breeds on the Gulf coast and on the Atlantic coast to New Jersey;
after nesting, they occasionally wander northward as far as Nova Scotia;
winters from the Gulf States southwards.

[Illustration: ]


                  TUBE-NOSED SWIMMERS—Order Tubinares
                    SHEARWATERS—Family Procellaridæ


                                 FULMAR
                 86.     Fulmarus glacialis.     19 in.

Bill short and stout, compared to that of the shearwaters, strongly
hooked at the tip and with the nostrils opening out of a single tube,
prominently located on the top of the bill. They have two color phases,
the light one being gull-like, but the tail is gray like the mantle;
eyes brown; bill and feet yellowish. In the dark phase they are
uniformly gray above and below. These plumages appear to be independent
of sex or age. They are extremely abundant at some of their breeding
grounds in the far north. The birds are constant companions of the
whalers, and feed largely upon blubber that is thrown overboard.

Nest.—Their single white eggs are laid upon bare ledges of sea cliffs
(2.90 × 2.00).

Range.—Breeds in the North Atlantic and Arctic Oceans from Labrador and
northern Scotland northward; winters south regularly.

[Illustration: ]


                            CORY SHEARWATER
                 88.     Puffinus borealis.     21 in.

This rare bird is found off the coast of New England and in Long Island
Sound from July to September. It is slightly larger than the similar
Greater Shearwater, the back and head are lighter in color, the entire
underparts are white, and the bill is yellowish. Its nesting habits and
eggs are unknown, but they are supposed to breed in the Antarctic
regions.

The majority of specimens that have been taken have been found off
Chatham, Mass.


                           AUDUBON SHEARWATER
                92.     Puffinus lherminieri.     12 in.

This small shearwater, except in point of size, is quite similar to the
following, but the under parts are white, except the under tail coverts
which are sooty; the back and head are somewhat lighter too. They nest
in abundance on some of the Bahaman and West Indian Islands, and can
usually be met with off the South Atlantic coast in summer.

Their eggs, which are pure white (2.00 × 1.35), are deposited at the end
of burrows dug by the birds.

[Illustration: ]


                           GREATER SHEARWATER
                  89.     Puffinus gravis.     20 in.

Entire upper parts, top and sides of head, bill and feet, grayish or
brownish-black; middle of belly and under tail coverts dusky. This
species is the most abundant of the shearwaters found off our coast.
They are constant attendants of the fishermen when they are at work, and
at other times are usually to be seen flying low over the water, or
resting in large bodies upon its surface. Their flight is peculiar and
distinctive,—three flaps of the wings then a short sail, repeated over
and over. Possibly this habit is acquired by their swooping down into
the troughs of waves, then flapping to clear the next crest. They are
very greedy and continually quarreling among themselves in order to get
the lion’s share of the food. They are called “Haglets” by the
fishermen.

Notes.—Harsh, discordant squawks when feeding.

Nest.—While the habits of these birds are well known their breeding
places are yet a mystery.

Range.—Whole North Atlantic coast in summer.

[Illustration: ]


                            SOOTY SHEARWATER
                  94.     Puffinus griseus.     17 in.

Sooty grayish-black all over except the under wing coverts, which are
whitish; eye brown, bill and feet black. A few of these may usually be
seen with flocks of the Greater Shearwaters, and sometimes a flock
composed entirely of this variety will be encountered. They are expert
swimmers on the surface of the water, but I have never seen one dive.
Their food is almost if not wholly composed of oily refuse gathered from
the surface of the water. In order to take flight, they paddle along the
water a few steps; it is difficult for them to rise, except against the
wind. If you sail upon them from the windward, they go squawking and
pattering over the water in all directions, and can frequently be caught
in nets. They are very tame, and will sometimes take food offered them,
from the hand.

Notes.—Guttural squawks like those of the large species.

Range.—North Atlantic coast in summer.

[Illustration: ]


                             STORMY PETREL
              104.     Thalassidroma pelagica.     5.5 in.

Smallest of our petrels, and darker than either the Leach or Wilson;
tail square; upper tail coverts white, tipped with black.

This species is rare on the coasts of this country, but is common on the
shores of the old world. It is the original “Mother Cary’s Chicken.”
They nest abundantly on the shores of Europe and the British Isles.

Their single white eggs, deposited at the end of burrows, are dull white
with a faint wreath of brown dots.


                             WILSON PETREL
                109.     Oceanites oceanicus.     7 in.

Tail square at end; coverts white, not tipped with black; legs long,
with yellow webs. This species is very abundant on our Atlantic coast
from July to Sept., spending the summer here after having nested in the
Kerguelen Is. in February. Their upper parts are much more darker than
those of Leach Petrel.

Their note is a weak twittering “keet-keet.”

[Illustration: ]


                              LEACH PETREL
               106.     Oceanodroma leucorhoa.     8 in.

Tail forked; tail coverts white, not tipped with black; legs much
shorter than those of Wilson Petrel, which is the only other common
species on our eastern coasts. Leach Petrel is a very abundant breeding
bird on Maine islands and northward. Some of the soft peaty banks of
islands are honeycombed with entrances to their burrows, which extend
back, near the surface of the ground, for two or three feet, and
terminate in an enlarged chamber. Here one of the birds is always found
during the period of incubation, and sometimes both birds, but one is
usually at sea feeding during the daytime, returning at night to relieve
its mate. All petrels and their eggs have a peculiar, characteristic and
oppressive odor.

Notes.—A weak clucking.

Nest.—Single egg at end of burrow; white with a very faint ring of brown
dots around the large end.

Range.—Breeds northward from Maine; winters to Virginia.

[Illustration: ]


                TOTIPALMATE SWIMMERS—Order Steganopodes
                     TROPIC BIRD—Family Phæthontidæ


                       YELLOW-BILLED TROPIC BIRD
             112.     Phæthon americanus.     30 to 34 in.

Form tern-like, but with the central tail feathers much lengthened
(about 18 in.); legs short and not very strong; all four toes connected
by webs.

These beautiful creatures fly with the ease and grace of a tern, but
with more rapid beating of the wings. They are strong and capable of
protracted flight, often being found hundreds of miles from land. They
feed upon small fish which they capture by diving upon from a height
above the water, and upon snails, etc., that they get from the beaches
and ledges. They are very buoyant, and sit high in the water with their
tails elevated to keep them from getting wet.

Nest.—A mass of weeds and seaweed placed upon rocky ledges. The single
egg that they lay is creamy, so thickly sprinkled and dotted with
purplish brown as to obscure the ground color (2.10 × 1.45).

Range.—Breeds north to the Bahamas and Bermudas.

[Illustration: ]


                         GANNETS—Family Sulidæ


                            BLUE-FACED BOOBY
                   114.     Sula cyanops.     28 in.

Bill, face and naked throat pouch, slaty-blue; eye yellow; feet reddish.
Plumage white except the primaries, secondaries and other tail feathers,
which are black. Young birds are streaked above with gray and brownish,
and are dull white below. Boobies are birds of wide distribution in the
Tropics, this species being rarely seen in southern Florida, but quite
abundant on some of the West Indian islands. Owing to the numerous air
cells beneath their skin, they are very buoyant and can ride the waves
with ease during severe storms. They secure their prey, which is chiefly
fish, by plunging after it.

Nest.—Their one or two eggs are laid usually upon the bare ground on low
islands, or sometimes in weed-lined hollows. The eggs are pure white,
covered with a thick chalky deposit (2.50 × 1.70).

Range.—Breeds north to the Bahamas and the Gulf of California; sometimes
strays to Florida.

[Illustration: ]


                                 BOOBY
                 115.     Sula leucogastra.     30 in.

This species, commonly called the Brown Booby, is brownish black with
the exception of a white breast and underparts. Young birds are entirely
brownish black; bill and feet greenish yellow; eye white. They are one
of the most abundant breeding birds upon many of the Bahaman and West
Indian Islands. They have great powers of flight and dart about with the
speed of arrows, carrying their long bill and neck at full length before
them. They are awkward walkers, and, owing to their buoyancy, it is
difficult for them to swim under water, but they are unerring in
securing their prey by plunging upon it from a height.

Nest.—They breed in colonies of thousands, laying their two eggs upon
the bare sand or rocks. The eggs are chalky white, more or less nest
stained (2.40 × 1.60).

Range.—Breeds in the Bahamas and West Indies; wanders north casually to
the Carolinas.

[Illustration: ]


                                 GANNET
                   117.     Sula bassana.     35 in.

Primaries black; rest of plumage white; back of head tinged with straw
color; bill and feet bluish black. Young grayish or brownish black,
mottled above and streaked below. This species is the largest and most
northerly distributed of the gannet family. Thousands upon thousands of
them breed upon high rocky islets off the British coast. The only known
nesting places used by them in this country are Bird Rock and
Bonaventure Island in the Gulf of St. Lawrence; in these places they
nest by thousands, their rough piles of seaweed touching each other in
long rows on the narrow ledges.

Notes.—A harsh “gor-r-r-rok.” (Chapman).

Range.—North Atlantic, breeding, on the American side, only on islands
in the Gulf of St. Lawrence. Winters along the whole United States
coast, floating in large flocks out at sea, and rarely coming on land.

[Illustration: ]


                        DARTERS—Family Anhingdæ


                          ANHINGA; SNAKE BIRD
                  118.     Anhinga anhinga.     35 in.

Adult male with a glossy greenish-black head, neck and underparts, the
neck being covered behind, in breeding season, with numerous
filamentous, whitish plumes. Female and young with neck and breast fawn
color in front. Eyes red, face greenish and gular pouch orange. Middle
tail feathers curiously crimped. These peculiar birds spend their lives
within the recesses of swamps, the more dismal and impenetrable, the
better. They perch on limbs overhanging the water and dive after fish,
frogs, lizards, etc., that pass beneath, from which they get one of
their names, American Darter. They swim with the body submerged, with
only their serpent-like head and neck visible; hence they are called
Snake-birds.

Nest.—Of sticks and leaves in bushes or trees over water, large colonies
of them nesting in the same swamp. The 3 to 5 eggs are bluish, covered
with a chalky deposit (2.25 × 1.35).

Range.—Breeds north to the Carolinas and Ill. Winters in Gulf States.

[Illustration: ]


                   CORMORANTS—Family Phalacrocoracidæ


                               CORMORANT
                119.     Phalacrocorax carbo.     36 in.

Largest of our cormorants; tail with 14 feathers. Adults with glossy
black head, neck and underparts; in breeding season with white plumes on
the neck and a white patch on the flanks. Young with throat and belly
white, rest of underparts mixed brown with black. Cormorants feed
chiefly upon fish which they pursue and catch under water. They were
formerly extensively, and are now to a less extent, used by the Chinese
to catch fish for them, a ring being placed around their neck to prevent
their swallowing their prey.

Nest.—Made of seaweed and sticks on narrow ledges of rocky islets or sea
cliffs, this species being entirely maritime. The four eggs are
greenish-white, covered with a chalky deposit (2.50 × 1.40).

Range.—Breeds from Nova Scotia and Newfoundland north to Labrador and
Greenland; winters south to the middle states.

[Illustration: ]


                        DOUBLE-CRESTED CORMORANT
               120.     Phalacrocorax auritus.     30 in.

Tail with 12 feathers; distinguished from the last species in any
plumage by the shape of the gular sac; on the common Cormorant the
feathers on the throat extend forward to a point, making the hind end of
the pouch heart-shaped, while in the present species it is convex. In
breeding plumage, this species has a tuft of black feathers on either
side of the head. The throat pouch is orange yellow; eyes green. These
cormorants are found to some extent along the Atlantic coast, in summer,
from Maine northward, but they are chiefly birds of the interior, being
particularly abundant in Manitoba.

Nest.—On ledges on the coast, and on the ground in the interior, or in
trees. The nests are made of sticks and weeds, shallow, shabby platforms
holding 3 or 4 eggs. The eggs are bluish-green and chalky.

Range.—Breeds from Maine, on the coast, Minnesota northward; locally in
North Carolina. Winters in the Gulf States. 120a., Fla. Cormorant, found
in the South Atlantic and Gulf States, is smaller.

[Illustration: ]


                           MEXICAN CORMORANT
           121.     Phalacrocorax vigua mexicanus.     25 in.

Adults with feathers bordering on the gular sac, white. In breeding
plumage, the sides of head and neck have tufts of filmy white feathers,
eyes green, as they are in all cormorants. All cormorants are expert
swimmers and fishermen. They never plunge for their prey, but pursue and
catch it under water, the same as do the grebes. When perching, they sit
erect with their neck bent in the form of a letter S. They fly with
their necks outstretched, and with rather slow wing beats. They are very
gregarious and nest in large colonies, this species always being found
in swamps or heavy shrubbery, surrounding bodies of water.

Nest.—Usually in trees overhanging the water, or upon the ground, in
either case being made of sticks and weeds. The 3 to 5 eggs are
bluish-green, covered with a chalky deposit (2.25 × 1.35).

Range.—Breeds north to the extreme southern boundary of the United
States; wanders north casually to Ill. in summer.

[Illustration: ]


                       PELICANS—Family Pelecanidæ


                             WHITE PELICAN
            125.     Pelecanus erythrorhynchus.     5 feet.

White with black primaries. Eye white; bill and feet yellow, the former
in the breeding season being adorned with a thin upright knob about
midway on the top of the upper mandible. The large pouch, with which
pelicans are armed, is used as a dip net to secure their food, which
consists of small fish. The White Pelican scoops up fish as he swims
along the surface of the water; when he has his pouch partially filled,
he tilts his head, contracts the pouch, thereby squeezing the water out
of the sides of his mouth, and swallows his fish.

Nest.—Of sticks and weeds on the ground on islands or shores of inland
lakes. They breed in colonies, and lay their eggs in June. The two or
three eggs are pure white (3.45 × 2.30).

Range.—Breeds in the interior from Utah and Minn. northward. Winters on
the Gulf coast and in Florida; rare on the Atlantic coast.

[Illustration: ]


                             BROWN PELICAN
             126.     Pelecanus occidentalis.     4.5 feet.

Pouch greenish; eye white; back of neck in breeding season, rich velvety
brown; at other seasons the whole head is white. These pelicans nest
abundantly on some of the islands on the Gulf coast of the U. S., on
Pelican Island on the east coast of Florida, and sometimes on the coast
of Georgia and South Carolina. Like the White Pelican, this species
lives chiefly upon small fish, but they procure them in a different
manner. They are continually circling about at a low elevation above the
water and, upon sighting a school of fish, will plunge headfirst into
it, securing as many as possible.

Nest.—Either on the ground or in low trees, in the latter case being
more bulky than in the former; composed of sticks and weeds. The three
to five eggs that they lay are pure white with the chalky covering
common to eggs of birds belonging to this order.

Range.—Breeds on the Gulf coast, and on the South Atlantic, north to
South Carolina; later may casually stray to New England; winters on the
South Atlantic and Gulf coasts.

[Illustration: ]


                   MAN-O’-WAR BIRDS—Family Fregatidæ


                     MAN-O’-WAR BIRD; FRIGATE BIRD
                  128.     Fregata aquila.     40 in.

Eye brown; bill long, comparatively slender, and flesh, colored; gular
sac orange; feet small and weak, with the four toes joined by webs.
Frigate birds are strictly maritime; they nest in large colonies and
usually travel in large companies. In expanse of wing compared to size
of body they are unequalled by any other bird, and in power of flight
they are only surpassed, possibly, by the albatrosses. They can walk
only with difficulty and are very poor swimmers, owing to their small
feet and long tail, but they are complete masters of the air and delight
to soar at great heights. Their food of small fish is secured by
plunging, or preying upon other sea birds.

Nest.—A low, frail platform of sticks in the tops of bushes or low
trees. They lay but a single white egg in March or April; size 2.80 ×
1.90.

Breeds in the Bahamas, West Indies, Lower California and possibly on
some of the Florida Keys.

[Illustration: ]


                             ORDER ANSERES


                           AMERICAN MERGANSER
                 129.     Mergus americanus.     25 in.

Bill, feet and eye red in male, the former with a black stripe along the
top; plumage black and white, with a greenish-black head; no crest.
Female gray and white, with brown head, crested; chin white; eye yellow.
These birds have the bill long, not flattened, but edged with sharp
teeth to grasp the fish, upon which they live to a great extent. They
are exceptionally good swimmers for members of this family, and can
chase and catch their fish, using their wings to aid their legs in
propelling them through the water.

Nest.—In holes of trees, cavities among the rocks, or less often on the
ground. The nest is made of leaves and grasses and lined with downy
feathers from the breast of the female. The 6 to 9 eggs are creamy-buff
(2.7 × 1.75); June.

Range.—Whole of North America. Breeds from New Brunswick, North Dakota
and California, northward. Winters from the northern boundary of the
U.S. south to the Gulf of Mexico.

[Illustration: ]


                         RED-BREASTED MERGANSER
                  130.     Mergus serrator.     22 in.

Eye, bill and feet red, like those of the last species, but the head is
crested on the male, as well as the female, and a band across his breast
is mixed rusty and black streaks. The female has not as brightly colored
a head as the female of the American Merganser, and the throat is not
pure white. They can be distinguished in any plumage, from the fact that
the nostril is nearer the eye than it is the tip of the bill, while that
of the last species is located midway between the eye and the tip of the
bill. This is the species that is most often found in salt water. It is
also found inland but not as commonly as the last.

Notes.—A low croak.

Nest.—On the ground, concealed in tufts of long grass or overhanging
rocks. Their 5 to 10 eggs are olive buff in color (2.50 × 1.70); June,
July.

Range.—Breeds from Maine and Ill., northward; winters throughout the
United States.

[Illustration: ]


                            HOODED MERGANSER
               131.     Lophodytes cucullatus.     17 in.

Bill short compared to those of other mergansers, and black. It is not
apt to be mistaken for any other duck, because of its small size and the
large crest with which both sexes are adorned, that of the male being
black with a large, white patch, and that of the female plain brown.

The male has the power of raising or lowering his crest; when excited he
will at times repeatedly open and shut it like a fan. When at a distance
on the water, the male might possibly be mistaken for the Buffle-head,
as that species also has white on the head, but its back also is largely
white. Both male and female have yellow eyes.

Notes.—Low, muttered croakings.

Nest.—In holes of trees on the banks of, or near, streams or lakes. The
bottom of the cavity is lined with grasses and down, and on this they
lay 8 to 12 grayish white eggs (2.15 × 1.70); May, June.

Range.—Breeds locally throughout the U. S., but most abundantly north of
our borders; winters in the South.

[Illustration: ]


                                MALLARD
                132.     Anas platyrhynchos.     23 in.

Male.—Head, green; speculum purplish-blue; bill olive-green; legs
orange; eyes brown. The female most closely resembles the Black Duck but
is lighter colored, more brownish, and the speculum, or wing patch, is
always bordered with white. This species is one of the handsomest and
most valuable of ducks. It is the cogener of the domestic ducks, and is
largely used as a table bird.

Their food consists chiefly of mollusks and tender grasses. These they
usually get in shallow water by “tipping up,” that is, reaching the
bottom without going entirely under water. They also visit meadows and
the edges of grain and rice fields for food.

Notes.—A nasal “quack,” often rapidly repeated when they are feeding.

Nest.—Of grass, lined with downy feathers, concealed in tufts of grass
near the water’s edge. The 6 to 10 eggs are buffy or olive-greenish
(2.25 × l.65).

Range.—Breeds from the northern tier of states northward; winters in
southern half of the U.S.

[Illustration: ]


                               BLACK DUCK
                   133.     Anas rubripes.     22 in.

General plumage mottled blackish, the feathers having lighter edges;
throat, buffy, streaked with blackish; crown and line through eye,
nearly solid blackish; speculum bluish-purple, with no white; bill
greenish-black; legs brownish. Black Ducks breed locally in pairs,
throughout northern United States and southern Canada. This is the
species most often seen in New England. When in flight, it can usually
be recognized by the dark colored underparts and the white lining to the
wings. Its habits are just like those of the Mallard, with which it is
closely related.

Notes.—A “quack,” like that of the Mallard.

Nest.—Placed on the ground, not far distant from the water’s edge; made
of grass and feathers; the 6 to 10 eggs are buff-colored (2.30 × 1.70);
May, June.

Range.—Breeds locally from N. Y. and Iowa northward; winters south to
the Gulf.

[Illustration: ]


                              FLORIDA DUCK
                  134.     Anas fulvigula.     21 in.

Much lighter than the Black Duck, all the feathers being broadly
margined with buffy; throat nearly clear buffy without markings. The
habits of this species, which is restricted to Florida and the Gulf
coast to Louisiana, are the same as those of the northern Black Duck.

Notes.—Precisely like those of the Mallard.

Nest.—Of grass and down, on the ground, the eggs being like those of the
Black Duck but averaging a trifle smaller (2.15 × 1.50); April.

Range.—Florida and the Gulf coast to La.; resident. 134a., Mottled Duck
(A. f. maculosa), is very similar to the Florida species, but is mottled
with black on the belly, instead of streaked. It is found on the coast
of Texas and north to Kansas.

[Illustration: ]


                                GADWALL
              135.     Chaulelasmus streperus.     20 in.

Male with chestnut wing coverts and white speculum; lining of wings
white; eyes brown. The female is similar, but the back and wings are
brownish-gray and the speculum gray and white. A rather rare migrant in
New England, common in the Middle States and abundant west of the
Mississippi. They are usually found in meadows and grain fields
bordering marshes or lakes. As is usual with ducks, these do most of
their feeding early in the morning or after dusk, and spend the greater
part of the day in sleeping. They are of the most active and noisy of
ducks, which accounts for their Latin name “streperus,” meaning noisy.

Notes.—A rapid, shrill quacking.

Nest.—Feather-lined hollows in the ground, concealed by patches of weeds
or tall grass. Eggs 7 to 10, creamy buff color (2.10 × 1.60); May, June.

Range.—Northern Hemisphere; breeds in northern United States, except the
eastern portion, and in Canada; winters along the South Atlantic and
Gulf coasts.

[Illustration: ]


                                WIDGEON
                      Mareca penelope.     19 in.

Crown buffy; head reddish brown; wing coverts white; speculum green.
Female with blackish speculum, and a pale, rusty head, neck, breast and
sides, streaked or barred with blackish. The Widgeon is an Old World
duck that rarely, and accidentally, strays to our Atlantic or Pacific
coasts. It breeds in America only in the Aleutian Islands. Its habits
are the same as the next species, our American Widgeon.

In the Old World it is regarded as one of the best of table ducks. Its
food consists of marine and freshwater insects, small shell-fish,
seaweed and grass. Its nidification is just like that of the Baldpate.

[Illustration: ]


                       BALDPATE; AMERICAN WIDGEON
                 137.     Mareca americana.     19 in.

Wing coverts and top of head white; rest of head and neck finely specked
with black; speculum and broad stripe back of eye, green; female,
similar but with the whole head specked, and with no green on the ears.
They can usually be identified at a distance by the absence of any dark
areas, and when flying by the whiteness of the underparts. Baldpates are
common and well known birds throughout North America, where they are
called by a great variety of names, most of which refer to the bald
appearance of the top of the head, owing to the white feathers. Their
food consists of mollusks, insects, grain, and tender shoots of grass;
their flesh is, consequently, very palatable and they are much sought as
table birds.

Notes.—A shrill, clear whistle.

Nest.—Of grass, lined with feathers from the breast of the female;
situated on the ground in tall grass near the water’s edge. 8 to 10 buff
eggs (2.15 × 1.50); June.

[Illustration: ]


                           GREEN-WINGED TEAL
                139.     Nettion carolinense.     14 in.

Head reddish-brown; speculum and large patch back of eye, green; a white
crescent in front of wing. Female with the head and neck whitish, finely
streaked with dusky; wings as in male. These ducks are abundant in most
parts of the United States, but are rather uncommon in New England. They
are usually seen in flocks of ten or a dozen, and often a single bird,
or two or three, may be found with a flock of Mallards. They frequent
ponds, marshes and rush-grown shores of creeks, rivers or lakes, feeding
upon shellfish, insects, aquatic plants and seeds.

Notes.—Shrill, piping whistles, rapidly repeated.

Nest.—On the ground under the shelter of tall grass; it is made of weeds
and grass, and lined with feathers. They lay from 5 to 9 eggs, buffy
(1.85 × 1.25); May, June.

Range.—Breeds from the northern tier of states northward; winters from
Va., Ill. and British Columbia, southward.

[Illustration: ]


                            BLUE-WINGED TEAL
               140.     Querquedula discors.     15.5 in.

Male.—Head gray, with a white crescent in front of the eye; underparts
buffy, heavily spotted with black; wing coverts blue; speculum green.
Female similar to the female Green-winged Teal, but with blue wing
coverts. Teal can easily be distinguished from other ducks by their
small size; the present species can usually be separated from the last,
by the darker underparts, the longer neck and smaller head. Their flight
is very rapid; it probably appears to be more rapid than that of other
ducks because of the much smaller size of the Teal. They usually fly in
compact lines and when ready to alight, do so very precipitously.

Notes.—A weak, but rapidly uttered quacking.

Nest.—Made of weeds, placed in tall grass bordering marshes or ponds. 6
to 10 buffy eggs are laid during May or June (1.90 × 1.30).

Range.—Breeds from Maine, Ohio and Kansas northward; winters in the
lower half of eastern United States.

[Illustration: ]


                             CINNAMON TEAL
              141.     Querquedula cyanoptera.     16 in.

Male with the whole head, neck and underparts bright cinnamon; wings as
in the Blue-winged species. Female similar to the female Blue-wing, but
more rusty below, and the throat is tinted or quite dark, while that of
the last species is usually light. These beautiful birds are very
abundant west of the Rocky Mountains, but are of only casual or
accidental occurrence east of the Mississippi Valley and sometimes
Southern Florida. Their favorite nesting places are in fields of tall
grass or clover, in close proximity to marshes or ponds.

Nest.—Compactly woven of grasses and lined with down; they lay from
eight to as many as thirteen buffy white eggs, size 1.85 × 1.35; May,
June.

Range.—Breeds in Western United States and British Columbia. Occurs
rarely in the Mississippi Valley, Southern Texas and Florida.

[Illustration: ]


                               SHOVELLER
                 142.     Spatula clypeata.     20 in.

Bill long, and much broader at the tip than at the base; head and
speculum green; belly reddish-brown; breast and back, white; wing
coverts, pale blue; eye yellow; feet orange. Female with head, neck and
underparts, brownish-yellow, specked or streaked with dusky; wings as in
the male, but not as brightly colored. Easily recognized in any plumage
by the large, broad bill. If it were not for this large and ungainly
shaped bill, this species might be classed as one of our most beautiful
ducks, when in full plumage, which is only during the breeding season;
at other seasons the head of the male is largely mixed with blackish.

Nest.—Of fine grasses and weeds, lined with feathers; they lay 6 to 10
grayish eggs (2.10 × 1.50); May.

Range.—Whole of the northern hemisphere. Breeds in America, from
Minnesota and Dakota northwards, and locally farther south; winters on
the South Atlantic and Gulf coasts; rare during migrations on the North
Atlantic coast.

[Illustration: ]


                                PINTAIL
                   143.     Dafila acuta.     22 in.

Tail pointed, and, in the male, with the two central feathers
considerably lengthened; neck unusually long and slender for a duck;
form more slender than that of other ducks. Male with brownish head and
stripe down back of neck; back and sides barred with black and white;
speculum green, bordered with white or buff. Female mottled brownish,
buffy and black, but to be known by the sharply pointed tail feathers
and long neck; speculum brownish. These ducks are strong swimmers and
good fliers, but poor divers; they get their food the same as does the
Mallard by “tipping up,” their long neck enabling them to feed in
comparatively deep water. They are quite timid and lurk in the tall
grass of the marshes during the daytime, feeding chiefly after dark.

Notes.—Quacks like those of the Mallard.

Nest.—On the ground, and like that of other ducks, well lined with
feathers; 6 to 12 eggs (2.20 × 1.50).

Range.—Breeds from Ill. and Iowa northward; winters in southern half of
the U. S.

[Illustration: ]


                               WOOD DUCK
                    144.     Aix sponsa.     19 in.

Head crested in both sexes, the feathers being especially lengthened on
the nape. No other American duck that can possibly be mistaken for them.
The male Wood Duck is the most beautiful of the family, in this or any
other country, its only rival being the gaily colored Mandarin, of
China. In summer, they may be found about the edges of clear ponds or
lakes, especially those located in woods remote from human habitations.
They are very local in their distribution and only one or two pairs will
be found in a locality. In most parts of their range they are rapidly
diminishing in numbers.

Notes.—A soft whistled “peet, peet” and a squawky danger-note like
“hoo-eek, hoo-eek.”

Nest.—In the hollow of a tree usually near the water’s edge. The bottom
is lined with soft downy feathers, and 8 to 15 buffy eggs are laid (2.00
× 1.50).

Range.—Whole of the United States and southern Canada, breeding locally
throughout the range. Winters in southern half of the U. S.

[Illustration: ]


                                REDHEAD
                 146.     Marila americana.     19 in.

Note the shape of the bill of this species, as compared to that of the
similarly colored Canvas-back. The male Redhead has a bluish bill with a
black tip, and his back is much darker than that of the Canvas-back; eye
yellow. The female has the throat white and the back plain
grayish-brown, without bars. Redheads dive and swim with great agility;
they feed largely upon water plants and mollusks which they get from the
bottom of ponds, or along the seashore. They breed very abundantly in
the sloughs of the prairies in the Northwest.

Notes.—A hollow, rapid croaking.

Nest.—Of grasses, lined with feathers, in marshes. Their 6 to 12 eggs
are buffy white (2.40 × 1.70); May, June.

Range.—Breeds chiefly in the interior, from Minnesota and Dakota
northward, and to a lesser degree north from Maine. Winters in southern
part of the U. S.

[Illustration: ]


                              CANVAS-BACK
                147.     Marila vallisneria.     21 in.

Differs from the Redhead in the shape of its black bill, its blackish
forehead, very light back and red eyes. The female has the back
grayish-brown, finely barred with black. Like the last species,
Canvas-backs are excellent swimmers and divers, and can secure their
food from a considerable depth. In winter they are found in great
abundance on the Atlantic coast from Maryland southward, and are one of
the most persistently hunted birds, for their flesh is much esteemed,
and they have a high market value. They are seen in large flocks, and
are difficult to approach, but are said to decoy as easily as any other.

Notes.—Harsh croaks, little different from those of the Redhead.

Nest.—On the ground in marshes or sloughs, the hollow being lined with
grasses and feathers from the breast of the female; 6 to 10 eggs (2.40 ×
1.70).

Range.—Breeds in the interior from Minnesota and Dakota northward;
winters from Maryland and British Columbia southward. Rare in New
England.

[Illustration: ]


                          AMERICAN SCAUP DUCK
                   148.     Marila marila.     18 in.

Head black, glossed with greenish; speculum white; bill dull bluish; eye
yellow. Female resembles that of the Redhead, but has a white speculum.
These ducks are perhaps better known as Blue-bills, than as Scaup Ducks.
They are one of the most abundant migrants on the Atlantic coast, and
are one of the most active of the family, diving at the flash of a gun.

Notes.—A peculiar grunting quack.

Nest.—Of grass and feathers on the ground in marshes.

Range.—Breeds from Minnesota and Dakota northward. Winters south of New
England.


                           LESSER SCAUP DUCK
                  149.     Marila affinis.     17 in.

Slightly smaller than the last, and with the head of the male glossed
purple instead of green.

Range.—Breeding range same as that of the last; winters in the southern
half of the U. S.

[Illustration: ]


                            RING-NECKED DUCK
                  150.     Marila collaris.     17 in.

Male with a narrow chestnut neck ring; head glossed with purple; back
black; chin white; bill blackish, with a bluish band near the end; eye
yellow. Female with white cheeks, eye ring and region about the base of
the bill; otherwise similar to the female of the Redhead, but smaller.

These ducks are usually met in flocks of from one to three dozen, the
same as the preceding two black-headed ducks. Their flight is very
rapid, and they are equally agile when in the water. They are seen on
the Atlantic coast only in winter, and remain just as far north as the
water remains open.

Notes.—A low grunting “quanck.”

Nest.—Of grasses and feathers in marshes and on bogs. The 6 to 10 eggs
are grayish-white (2.25 × 1.60); June.

Range.—Breeds in the interior of Minnesota northwards; winters
throughout the United States.

[Illustration: ]


                              BUFFLE-HEAD
               153.     Charitonetta albeola.     14 in.

Head iridescent with green, purple and blue, and with a large white
patch extending from eye to eye, across the back of the puffy crest.
Female with a white patch on either side of her brownish head; speculum
white. They are known by a great variety of names such as “Butter Ball,”
“Spirit Duck,” “Dipper,” etc., the majority of which refer to the
celerity with which they can disappear under the water. They are always
on the alert and will dive at the flash of a gun. They are able to
continue incessant diving for a long period and can remain under water
for a long time. Their flight is very rapid, and when alighting in the
water they make considerable splash, but can take wing from it easier
than the majority of ducks.

Notes.—A single guttural croak.

Nest.—In hollow trees; eggs greenish gray (2.00 × 1.40); June.

Range.—Breeds from the northern boundary of the U. S. northward; winters
throughout the U. S.

[Illustration: ]


                          AMERICAN GOLDEN-EYE
            151.     Clangula clangula americana.     20 in.

Head puffy, or slightly crested. Male with greenish head and a round
white spot between bill and eye. Female with a brownish head and white
speculum.

Notes.—A hoarse croak, rarely uttered.

Nest.—In cavities of hollow trees near ponds or on the banks of streams.
6 to 10 grayish green eggs (2.30 × 1.70); June.

Range.—Breeds from the northern parts of the northern tier of states,
northward; winters throughout the U. S.


                           BARROW GOLDEN-EYE
                152.     Clangula islandica.     20 in.

Head bluish with a white crescent at base of bill; eye bright yellow in
both this and the last species; female practically indistinguishable
from the preceding, although the bill of the present species is shorter
and comparatively higher at the base.

Range.—Breeds from Northern U. S. north to Labrador and Alaska, and in
the Rockies, south to Colorado; winters in the northern half of the U.
S.

[Illustration: ]


                      OLD SQUAW; LONG-TAILED DUCK
             154.     Harelda hyemalis.     ♂ 21; ♀ 16 in.

This species is one of the very few ducks that change their plumages in
summer and winter. The female is marked similarly to the male but is
very much duller colored, and lacks the long tail feathers with which
the male is adorned. They are sea ducks and, while they are usually
found to some extent on some of the larger lakes or ponds, during
migrations, they are very abundant on the Atlantic coast. They are
excellent swimmers and dive to great depths in search of food. It is
said (Nelson) that in their summer home, during the mating season, they
frequently dive under the water from the air, a habit that none of the
other ducks, except rarely the Pintail, indulge in.

Notes.—A confused, but rather musical gabbling.

Nest.—On the ground near water; thickly lined with downy feathers; eggs
laid in June.

Range.—Breeds from Labrador and Alaska northward; winters south to Long
Island Sound and the upper Mississippi Valley.

[Illustration: ]


                             HARLEQUIN DUCK
             155.     Histrionicus histrionicus.     17 in.

Male very oddly and handsomely marked, as shown; female blackish-brown,
lighter below and with a whitish spot before and one behind each eye.
During the winter, they are seen in flocks off the coast, from Maine and
sometimes from Long Island Sound northward. In summer, they are usually
found only in pairs along rivers or creeks, and in the Rocky Mountains
they frequent the turbulent streams that are the homes of the Water
Ouzel. When swimming, Harlequins sit high in the water, but they are
able to get under the surface with the greatest of speed.

Notes.—A rapidly uttered, clattering whistle.

Nest.—On the ground, in crevices under rocks, the hollow being well
lined with down; also said to nest in hollow trees; their 5 to 8 eggs
are greenish-buff and measure 2.30 × 1.60; June.

Range.—Breeds from New Brunswick north and northwest to Alaska and the
Arctic Ocean, and south in the Rockies to Colorado; winters south to the
Middle States and Calif.

[Illustration: ]


                             LABRADOR DUCK
            156.     Camptorhynchus labradorius.     20 in.

Male with the head, breast and wings, white; narrow stripe over the top
of the head and down the back of the neck, ring around the neck, back,
primaries and entire underparts, black. Female mottled brownish-gray and
blackish, with white speculum.

Labrador Ducks were never very abundant within the memory of any living
person, but they were occasionally shot and were found sometimes in the
New York markets. At that time little heed was paid to them and they
became extinct before anyone realized the fact. Their record has been
traced down to 1875, since which time none have been taken. As far as
known there are but 38 or 40 of them preserved. They were formerly found
from Long Island Sound north to Labrador.

[Illustration: ]


                             NORTHERN EIDER
           159.     Somateria mollissima borealis.     23 in.

Base of bill extends on either side of forehead in a point, a mark that
will distinguish it from the next and very similar species, in any
plumage. The female Eider presents a most remarkable difference in
plumage from that of the male, and, unlike the females of most species,
is a very handsome bird.

Nest.—Of grasses lined with down; concealed in tall grass or under
bushes; the 6 to 10 eggs are greenish-drab (3.00 × 2.00); May, June.

Range.—Breeds on Labrador and Greenland coasts.


                             AMERICAN EIDER
                160.     Somateria dresseri.     23 in.

This is the Eider that is usually seen on the Atlantic coast and is the
only one that breeds south of Labrador. The base of the bill, that
encroaches on either side of the forehead is rounded, and broader than
that of the last. They nest from Maine (rarely) northward, and winter
south to Long Island.

[Illustration: ]


                               KING EIDER
               162.     Somateria spectabilis.     23 in.

The feathers of the sides of the bill of this species do not reach to
the nostril, while in the two preceding ones, they do. This is the chief
point of difference in distinguishing the females, which very closely
resemble each other. Adult males, as can be seen, are very different
from the other Eiders. As is usual with the Eiders, the male of this
species moults to a plumage resembling that of the female, during the
late summer, when he has shed his wing feathers and is, for a period
flightless. This is a part of Nature’s plan to give her feathered
children protection when they most need it. While the females are
sitting upon the eggs, they are deserted by the males, which congregate
in large flocks, and drift aimlessly about until joined by the females
in Fall.

Nest.—A depression in the ground, lined with feathers. Eggs like those
of the last species.

Range.—Breeds from northern Labrador and the Aleutian Islands, Alaska,
northward; winters south to Maine and casually to Long Island Sound.

[Illustration: ]


                            AMERICAN SCOTER
                 163.     Oidemia americana.     19 in.

Adult male, entirely black; bill black with enlarged base yellow; eye
brown. Female plain brownish-black, lighter below. All the Scoters are
better known to sportsmen as “coots,” this species being the
Butter-billed Coot, while the female is the Gray Coot.

Notes.—A long musical whistle. (Elliott).

Nest.—On the ground usually well concealed. Their 6 to 10 eggs are a
creamy buff color (2.50 × 1.70).

Range.—Breeds from Labrador northward. Winters south to the Middle
States and Lake States.


                          WHITE-WINGED SCOTER
                 165.     Oidemia deglandi.     22 in.

This species is the most abundant of the Scoters wintering off the New
England coast, where they congregate in immense “rafts,” floating off
shore.

Nest.—Concealed in long grass, lined with feathers; 5 to 8 buffy eggs
(2.75 × 1.85); June.

Range.—Breeds from North Dakota and Newfoundland northward; winters in
the northern half of U. S.

[Illustration: ]


                              SURF SCOTER
               166.     Oidemia perspicillata.     20 in.

Male black with a white patch on top of the head and another on the
nape; eye white; bill red, white and yellow, with a large black spot
near the base. Female a uniform grayish brown, lighter below, with a
whitish patch in front of each eye; young birds are like the female but
also have a white patch back of the eye. That they are very abundant is
apparent from the size of a single flock seen by Nelson about 10 miles
out to sea from St. Michaels, Alaska; it formed a continuous band for
about 10 miles in length and from a half to three-quarters of a mile in
width. All the “Coots” have heavy bodies, making it rather difficult for
them to rise from the water, along which they run for a few yards before
springing into the air.

Nest.—A feather lined hollow on the ground, like that of other ducks;
eggs creamy buff (2.40 × 1.70).

Range.—Breeds from Newfoundland, Manitoba, and British Columbia
northward; winters south to Virginia, Ohio and California.

[Illustration: ]


                               RUDDY DUCK
              167.     Erismatura jamaicensis.     15 in.

Bill short, broad, with an upturned appearance; tail feathers very
narrow, stiff and pointed. Male in summer, with black crown, whitish
cheeks, throat and belly, and reddish-brown back, breast and sides. In
winter, the cheeks are duller colored and the back mixed with grayish.
Female with crown, back and sides grayish; cheeks showing traces of
white as on the male. These ducks are very sprightly, either in the
water, on land, or a-wing. Their flight is very rapid, their stiff,
short wings producing a buzzing sound that gives them the local name of
Bumble Bee Coot. They have a great variety of names referring to some
character of their form, such as Broad-bill Dipper, Bull-neck,
Bristle-tail, etc.

Nest.—Of grasses or rushes, lined with down, placed in tall grass near
the water or in clumps of rushes growing out of the water; 6 to 12
grayish eggs (2.40 × 1.75), very large for the size of the bird; June.

Range.—Breeds in the interior of northern U. S. and in Canada; winters
in southern United States.

[Illustration: ]


                           LESSER SNOW GOOSE
                  169.     Chen hypeboreus.     25 in.

Plumage entirely white; ends of primaries black; top and back of head
sometimes tinged with rusty; bill and feet red; eye brown. This variety
is like the next, which is the bird commonly seen in the East, although
the Lesser Goose is found east to the Mississippi Valley.


                           GREATER SNOW GOOSE
                  169a.     C. h. nivalis.     33 in.

Snow Geese travel in large flocks, the same as do the Canada Geese, led
by an old male that has traveled the airy road many times before. At
times, flocks are seen on the prairies, so large that they give the
ground the appearance of being covered with snow. They are very wary and
will all take flight at the first alarm.

Notes.—Usually silent, but they sometimes “honk.”

Nest.—Of grasses, sometimes, but not always, lined with down; 5 to 8
buffy white eggs (3.40 × 2.40); June.

Range.—Breeds in the Arctic regions; winters on the South Atlantic
coast.

[Illustration: ]


                               BLUE GOOSE
                169.1.     Chen cœrulescens.     28 in.

Head and neck white, often tinged with rusty on the face; underparts
brownish-gray. Young birds are similar but the head is brownish; bill
and feet reddish; eye brown. This handsome goose is found only in the
interior, but a few accidental birds have been taken on the Atlantic and
two on the Pacific coasts. While it is not an abundant species, flocks
of twenty or thirty are often seen in the Mississippi Valley. They are
sometimes seen with Snow Geese, but for the most part keep by
themselves. On their march to their breeding grounds they branch off
from the routes chosen by the Snow Geese, and turn to the eastward,
breeding east of Hudson Bay, while the white geese are found chiefly to
the westward.

Nest.—A grass-lined depression on the ground; eggs deep buff color (2.50
× 1.75); June.

Range.—Breeds in the Hudson Bay region and in Labrador; winters on the
west coast of the Gulf of Mexico, migrating through the Mississippi
Valley.

[Illustration: ]


                      AMERICAN WHITE-FRONTED GOOSE
             171a.     Anser albifrons gambeli.     28 in.

Forehead, white; head and neck gray; underparts mixed black and white;
feet yellow; bill pinkish; eye brown. These geese reach the U. S. on
their return from the Arctic regions about the first of October; they
are very abundant on the Pacific coast and fairly common in the
Mississippi Valley, but are rare on the Atlantic coast. They are very
noisy birds and in some sections of the country are known as Laughing
Geese. From being shot at so frequently, they are very wild and
difficult to approach, sentinels being stationed to give alarm if danger
approaches, when they are feeding.

Notes.—A confused honking, likened to laughter.

Nest.—Of grasses on the ground, usually in marshes; nearly always lined
with down from the breast of the female. The four to nine eggs are buffy
(3.00 × 2.05); May, June.

Range.—Breeds in the Arctic regions, chiefly west of Hudson Bay; winters
south to the Gulf coast and Calif.; rare on the Atlantic coast.

[Illustration: ]


                              CANADA GOOSE
                 172.     Branta canadensis.     38 in.

The best known and most widely distributed of our geese. In the northern
states they are always eagerly looked for in the Spring, for their
arrival is a sure indication that the backbone of Winter has broken.
Their familiar honking is heard long before the thin, wavering, black,
V-shaped line appears on the horizon; as it draws nearer, the volume of
sound increases, resembling the baying of a pack of hounds, and at last,
the flock sweeps overhead with deafening cries; large birds, with long
necks fully outstretched, wings beating the air in unison, and all
following the leadership of one bird in their journey over their
invisible path.

Nest.—Of grasses and feathers, on marshes or near ponds; 4 to 9 buffy
drab eggs (3.50 × 2.50); May, June.

Range.—Breeds from Labrador, Dakota, and British Columbia northward;
winters in Southern U. S. 172a. Hutchins Goose (B. c. hutchinsii) is
smaller (31 in.) and found in Western N. A., casually east of the Miss.
172c. Cackling Goose (B. c. minima) is still smaller (24 in.); is found
in the same range.

[Illustration: ]


                                 BRANT
           173a.     Branta bernicla glaucogastra.     26 in.

Head, back and breast black, sharply defined against the grayish-white
of the underparts; a whitish patch on either side of the neck. They are
very abundant on the Atlantic coast in winter, and when not too
persistently hunted are unsuspicious; they do not fly in regular
formation like the Canada geese, nor do they appear to have any special
leader. They are inquisitive and easily decoyed, and consequently large
numbers of them are shot annually. They are noisy, their notes being a
peculiar, guttural “car-r-r-rup” or “r-r-rup,” and when in the presence
of a large flock, the sound is deafening. (Elliott).

They feed upon tender water plants and roots, which they get from the
bottom by tipping up, and not by diving.

Nest.—A depression in the ground, lined with grass and feathers; eggs
grayish-buff (2.80 × 1.75); June.

Range.—Breeds in the Arctic regions; winters on the Atlantic coast and
less often in the Mississippi Valley, from Mass. and Ill. southward.

[Illustration: ]


                        BLACK-BELLIED TREE DUCK
              177.     Dendrocygna autumnalis.     22 in.

Legs and neck long; bill and feet pinkish; eye brown; head and neck
chiefly gray; breast and back brownish; belly and under tail coverts,
black; wing-coverts white and gray. These peculiar shaped ducks are not
rare in certain localities along the Rio Grande in Southern Texas, and
are abundant in Mexico and Central America. They are not timid and are
frequently caught and domesticated. They can walk and run gracefully,
and often feed in grain fields at considerable distance from water; they
also eat shoots and seeds of aquatic plants. Like the Wood Duck, they
nest in hollow trees, often at some distance from water, and, as soon as
the young appear, help them to the ground and lead them to the water.

Notes.—A loud, shrill whistle.

Nest.—Usually lined with down, in cavities of hollow trees; the 6 to 15
eggs are pure white (2.05 × 1.50); May.

Range.—Found in the United States only in the Southern part of Texas.

[Illustration: ]


                           FULVOUS TREE DUCK
                178.     Dendrocygna bicolor.     22 in.

Form like that of the last, but with the head, neck, rump and underparts
rusty, and with no white in the wings. The Fulvous Duck is much more
abundant in the United States than the Black-bellied, and is casually
found as far north as Kansas and Nevada, while it is regularly found in
Texas and Louisiana, where it is known as the Long-legged Duck. Owing to
the nature of its diet, which consists chiefly of grain, roots and water
plants, the flesh of this bird is esteemed as an article of food, and
many are killed for such. When wounded, they are said to be difficult to
capture, owing to the speed at which they can run; they also swim and
dive well.

Nest.—Located in the hollow of a tree, the bottom of the cavity usually
being lined with feathers. They lay from ten to fifteen pure white eggs,
and as many as thirty-two have been found in one nest, but these were
probably laid by two or more females; May.

Range.—Texas and Louisiana, and north casually to Kansas and Nevada.
Winters in Mexico.

[Illustration: ]


                             WHISTLING SWAN
                 180.     Olor columbianus.     54 in.

Nostril situated at a greater distance from the eye than it is from the
end of the bill; a small yellow spot on the bare space in front of the
eye; plumage entirely white; bill and legs black. This is the swan that
is found on the Atlantic coast, and is most abundant in the Miss.
Valley. It is rare north of Chesapeake Bay, but it is abundant from
there southward, in winter. They make a beautiful sight against the blue
sky, their immense white wings slowly fanning the air and their long
necks extended.

Notes.—A peculiar, flageolet-like “Who, who, who.” (Elliott).

Nest.—A mass of weeds, grass and feathers on the ground; 3 to 6 greenish
buff eggs (4.00 × 2.75).

Range.—Breeds within the Arctic Circle; winters south to the Gulf of
Mexico; rare north of Va. on the Atlantic. 181. TRUMPETER SWAN (_Olor
bucinator_) is larger (65 in.) and is found west of the Miss. It breeds
from Ia., northwards. Nostril midway between eye and tip of bill.

[Illustration: ]


                           ORDER ODONTOGLOSSÆ
                    FLAMINGOES—Family Phœnicopteridæ


                                FLAMINGO
                182.     Phœncopterus ruber.     46 in.

These large, beautiful birds are found in Southern Florida, and casually
north to South Carolina, but it is doubtful if they breed within our
limits. They fly with their long neck fully extended and legs trailing
behind, a remarkable sight when a flock of several thousand is seen in
flight. In 1904, Mr. F. M. Chapman visited a large breeding colony in
the Bahamas, photographing the birds in every conceivable position.
Their nests are mud-built structures, about a foot high, placed close
together in the marshy interior of low lying islands, or on sandbars.
The top is slightly hollowed out to receive the single egg (3.40 ×
2.15), which is covered with a chalky deposit. They sit astride the nest
with their legs doubled under them.

Notes.—A honking like that of Canada Geese.

Range.—Resident in the Bahamas and West Indies; north to Florida.

[Illustration: ]


                HERONS, STORKS, IBISES—Order Herodiones
                           Family Plataleidæ


                           ROSEATE SPOONBILL
                    183.     Ajaia ajaja.     33 in.

Head entirely bald in adults, and only feathered to the eyes in young
birds; bill long, thin, flat and very much broadened at the end,
variously colored with green, blue and orange; eyes and legs red. Young
birds, without the bright carmine shoulders or saffron tail of the
adults. These peculiar but handsomely tinted birds were formerly
abundant in Florida and in the adjoining states, but so many have been
killed for their feathers, that they are now rare and confined to the
most inaccessible swamps of Southern Florida. Spoonbills travel and nest
in communities; their flight is strong and Heron-like, but they carry
their neck fully extended, their ample wings slowly beating the air.

Nest.—A frail structure of sticks, in mangroves or low trees; 3 or 4
pale, greenish blue eggs splashed with brown (2.50 × 1.70); May, June.

Range.—Florida and the Gulf States, and Southern Texas.

[Illustration: ]


                         IBISES—Family Ibididæ


                               WHITE IBIS
                    184.     Guara alba.     25 in.

Tips of primaries black; plumage, otherwise, entirely white; bill, face
and legs, orange red or carmine. Young with head and neck, and more or
less of the body, brownish or streaked with brown. White Ibises are very
abundant in the South Atlantic and Gulf States, breeding in immense
rookeries in remote swamps, placing their frail platforms in bushes over
the water or sometimes weaving nests out of rushes, attached to upright
canes and brake. These rookeries are very untidy and offensive to human
beings, and millions and millions of black flies and mosquitoes will be
encountered by any who wish to investigate the breeding places of these
birds.

Notes.—A loud, harsh croak.

Nest.—Of twigs in bushes, or of rushes in the tangle and brake of
marshes; 3 or 4 whitish eggs, handsomely spotted and splashed with
brownish.

Range.—Breeds north to South Carolina and Southern Ill. Winters from the
Gulf States southward.

[Illustration: ]


                              SCARLET IBIS
                    185.     Guara rubra.     25 in.

This beautiful species is wholly bright scarlet, except for the black
primaries; young birds are found in all stages of plumage from the
brownish-gray and white of the first year birds, to the full plumage of
the adults.

This is a tropical ibis that abounds in northern South America, but is
yearly decreasing in numbers, owing to the persistency with which they
are hunted, their feathers being much in demand for tying trout flies,
as well as for decorating hats, a barbarous practice that is being
stopped in this country, by legislation and public sentiment.

Nest.—In rushes or mangroves like that of the last species; the eggs are
the same size but average brighter in color (2.25 × 1.60).

Range.—Northern South America, casually north to the Gulf States, but
has not been reported for years in our country.

[Illustration: ]


                              GLOSSY IBIS
                186.     Plegadis autumnalis.     25 in.

Like the next, which is our common species, but with the feathers about
the face not white, as in that species.

Range.—Tropical America, casually north to southeastern United States.


                        WHITE-FACED GLOSSY IBIS
                 187.     Plegadis guarauna.     24 in.

Bill, face and legs, carmine red; feathers bordering the face, white;
wings and tail glossy greenish-black; rest of plumage rich
chestnut-brown, glossed with purple on the head. They nest by thousands
in extensive swamps, in company with herons.

Nest.—Strongly and compactly woven of dead rushes attached to living
stalks, well cupped, thus differing from that of any of the herons; eggs
plain greenish blue (1.95 × 1.35); deeper and brighter than those of any
of the herons.

Range.—Texas, New Mexico, Ariz., Calif., and southward.

[Illustration: ]


                         STORKS—Family Ciconidæ


                               WOOD IBIS
             188.     Mycteria americana.     40 to 46 in.

Entire head unfeathered and covered with scales; both head and legs are
pale bluish in color; eye brown; plumage entirely white except for the
glossy purplish-black primaries and tail. This large bird is a true
stork and is very similar to the common European Stork. The name ibis
was incorrectly and unfortunately applied to this species, and tends to
confusion. Its flight is very easy and graceful, accomplished with a
slow flapping of the wings, alternated at short intervals with long
sails. At times they mount high in the air and circle about like hawks
or vultures.

Notes.—Loud, hoarse croaks.

Nest.—A shallow platform of sticks in bushes or at low elevations in
trees, usually over the water, the birds swarming in the most
inaccessible swamps. Their 3 or 4 eggs are white and granular.

Range.—Breeds in the Gulf States and north to South Carolina; later may
stray north to New York.

[Illustration: ]


                     BITTERNS, ETC.—Family Ardeidæ


                            AMERICAN BITTERN
               190.     Botaurus lentiginosus.     28 in.

Much variegated with brown and yellowish-brown; adults with a long,
broad, black stripe on either side of the white throat; eye yellow; legs
and base of bill greenish-yellow. Bitterns have a great many local
names, most of which refer to the peculiar pumping noise that the male
makes during the mating season. Perhaps the most common of these is
“Stake-driver.” Bitterns are found in bogs or marshes; they remain
concealed by the tall grass until any intruder is very near, before they
take flight.

Notes.—A squawk of alarm; song a hollow “punker-lunk.”

Nest.—A grass-lined hollow in tufts of grass or turf, in the middle of
bogs or marshes. 3 or 4 plain brownish eggs, measuring 1.95 × 1.50. But
one or two pairs nest in a locality; May, June.

Range.—Breeds in the northern half of the United States and Southern
Canada; winters in southern half of the United States.

[Illustration: ]


                             LEAST BITTERN
                 191.     Ixobrychus exilis.     13 in.

Male with the crown and back glossy black; female with these areas
hair-brown, and streaked with brown below. These diminutive little
bitterns are very shy and retiring, and seldom seen away from the reed
grown marshes or ponds that they frequent.

Notes.—A hoarse croak, and a softly repeated “coo.”

Nest.—A platform of dead rushes twisted about the living stalks. The 3
or 4 eggs are pale bluish white. (1.2 × .9); May, June.

Range.—Breeds from the Gulf States, locally to Southern Canada; winters
from the Gulf States southward.


                           CORY LEAST BITTERN
               191.1.     Ixobrychus neoxynus.     13 in.

This extremely rare little bittern is of the same size and form as the
common species. The crown, back, wing-feathers and tail are black, and
the rest of the plumage is more or less intense chestnut brown. The
majority of specimens have been taken in Florida and Ontario, with one
each from Michigan and Massachusetts. There are about twenty of them
known to be preserved.

[Illustration: ]


                           GREAT WHITE HERON
                192.     Ardea occidentalis.     50 in.

This is the largest heron that we get in North America, surpassing even
the Great Blue. Its plumage is entirely white; no “aigrettes” on the
back, but two white plumes on the back of the head and the feathers of
the breast much lengthened, the same as in adult Blue Herons; bill, eyes
and legs yellow. A gray phase of this heron, or a hybrid between it and
the Great Blue Heron, is occasionally found in Southern Florida; it is
similar to the Blue Heron, but paler and with the head and neck white.

Nest.—A large platform of sticks placed in the tops of mangroves. Their
three or four eggs are not distinguishable from those of the next
species; June.

Range.—Said to be not uncommon on some of the Florida Keys.

[Illustration: ]


                            GREAT BLUE HERON
                  194.     Ardea herodias.     48 in.

Adult Blue Herons are very handsome birds, as may be seen in the
illustration. Young birds, and nine out of ten that we see will be young
birds, are much duller colored and have no plumes. It takes several
years for them to attain their perfect plumage. Their nests are placed
in the tops of the tallest trees and are, consequently, difficult to get
at. In some heronries, trees have been found containing as many as 40
nests. In flight, herons always carry their head drawn in against the
shoulders, the neck being curved below.

Nest.—A platform of sticks in tall trees in wet woods. 3 or 4 pale
greenish-blue eggs (2.50 × 1.50); May, June.

Range.—Breeds locally throughout the United States and Canada, either in
colonies, or single pairs where they are persecuted as in New England;
winters in Southern U.S. 149b. Ward Heron (A. h. wardi) is similar but
lighter below and the neck is darker and browner; it abounds in Florida.

[Illustration: ]


                             AMERICAN EGRET
                 196.     Herodias egretta.     41 in.

Entirely white, with no plumes on the head but with a long train of
straight “aigrette” plumes growing from the middle of the back; bill and
eye, yellow; legs and feet, black. Young and adults in winter, without
plumes. The hand of man, to gratify the desire of woman, has ruthlessly
slaughtered thousands upon thousands of these exquisitely beautiful
birds; in Florida where they were abundant a few years ago, only
stragglers are seen. A few of these heronries are yet left, either
because they are in wildernesses where man has not yet penetrated, or
are strongly protected by the humane owners of the land. It is only at
the breeding places that they can be killed in numbers, as at other
times they are shy; and it is only during nesting season that they wear
their beautiful plumes.

Nest.—A frail platform of sticks, at low elevations, in bushes usually
over water in swamps. Eggs, 3 or 4 in number, plain bluish green (2.25 ×
1.45); April to June.

[Illustration: ]


                              SNOWY HERON
               197.     Egretta candidissima.     24 in.

Plumage white; in breeding season with numerous recurved plumes growing
from the middle of the back; long crest of plumes on the back of the
head, and on the breast. Bill black, greenish at the base and about the
eyes; legs black; feet yellow. This species is the most beautiful of the
Egrets and consequently is the one that has suffered most from “plume
hunters.” Although they are now protected wherever they can be, their
ranks have been so decimated that extermination is threatened within a
few years; the demand for their plumes is still so great that lawless
men will commit murder to obtain them (Warden Bradley having been shot
in 1905, while preventing the destruction of herons in Southern
Florida).

Nest.—In swamps, in company with other small herons, the nests being
frail platforms of twigs on branches of trees. Eggs pale greenish-blue.

Range.—Breeding range formerly coincident with that of the last, but now
very rare.

[Illustration: ]


                             REDDISH EGRET
              198.     Dichromanassa rufescens.     29 in.

Two color phases, the gray being the most common:—Head and neck,
including plumes on neck and breast, reddish-brown; rest of plumage
gray, the plumes on the back being lightest; feet blue-black; bill
yellowish at the base and black at the tip. In the white phase, the
plumage is entirely, or nearly, white, including the plumes. As usual,
these egrets associate in large flocks, of their own kind or other small
herons. Their food consists of small fish, frogs, lizards, insects and
mice. They will stand motionless in shallow water, for a long time
waiting for their prey, and woe to the creature that comes within
striking distance of their spear-like bill. Their flight is strong and
graceful as they make their way from their breeding places to their
feeding grounds on the mud flats, left bare by the receding tide.

Nest.—Like that of other herons; eggs slightly more greenish blue than
those of the other egrets (1.9 × 1.45); May, June.

Range.—Breeds in the Gulf coast states, and north to South Carolina.

[Illustration: ]


                            LOUISIANA HERON
          199.     Hydranassa tricolor ruficollis.     26 in.

In breeding plumage, with short plumes on the back, extending three or
four inches beyond the tips of the wings. Throat, front line of neck,
and underparts white; head and neck reddish-purple; back and wings
slaty; crest whitish; bill and legs dark; eyes red. A very abundant
species throughout the year, on the Gulf coast of the United States.
Their bearing is one of self-esteem and their walk slow and stately;
they are often called “Lady of the Waters,” because of the imposing
picture that they make. They are very sociable, rarely quarrel among
themselves, and are usually found in company with Little Blue Herons and
Egrets.

Nest.—They nest in communities in mangroves in southern Florida and in
swamps, in company with many other species, in the northern portions of
their range. Their nesting habits and eggs are the same as those of the
Snowy Heron.

Range.—Breeds and is resident in the South Atlantic and Gulf States.

[Illustration: ]


                           LITTLE BLUE HERON
                  200.     Florida cærulea.     22 in.

Head and neck, maroon; rest of plumage slaty-blue; plumes on back of
head, breast and on the back; eyes yellow; bill and feet greenish. Young
birds are white, usually with a tinge of bluish on the forehead and ends
of the wings. They can be distinguished from the similar Snowy Herons by
the greenish-black legs, while the legs of the latter are black with
yellow feet. These little herons are resident and most abundant in the
South Atlantic and Gulf States. They are at home in and enjoy the
rankest and most impenetrable swamps, where only birds or reptiles can
tread with safety. Yet herons are an interesting group and, in their own
way, perform useful service to mankind by destroying quantities of
reptiles, insects and mice.

Nest.—The nesting habits and eggs of this species are the same as those
of the little Snowy Heron and the eggs cannot be distinguished with
certainty.

Range.—Breeds north to Virginia and Illinois; later may stray north to
New England.

[Illustration: ]


                              GREEN HERON
                201.     Butorides virescens.     17 in.

Smallest of the family, except the Least Bittern. In breeding plumage,
they are one of the most beautiful of herons. They may be found in
marshes, along creeks or about the edges of shallow ponds or lakes. They
are often seen sitting upon a partly submerged log sunning themselves,
or waiting for a tempting frog or fish to pass within reach. When they
are among rushes, they will usually attempt to escape observation by
mimicking their surroundings, and they do so very successfully. When
they are alarmed and take flight they utter a single sharp shriek. At
other times they utter a series of hollow screams, “qu-ick, qu-ick,” and
also a hollow croak.

Nest.—In bushes, in communities or in company with other species in the
south, but usually a few pairs nest in a locality in the northern states
and Canada. Eggs pale bluish-green (1.45 × 1.10).

Range.—Breeds from the Gulf to Manitoba and Nova Scotia; winters in the
Gulf States.

[Illustration: ]


                       BLACK-CROWNED NIGHT HERON
           202.     Nycticorax nycticorax nævius.     24 in.

Bill much heavier than that of the herons; neck and legs shorter and
stouter; eye red; bill black; legs and bare space in front of eye, pale
yellowish-green. Young birds are mottled with brownish-gray and white;
eyes yellow. As their name implies, these herons do most of their
feeding after dusk, sleeping during the greater part of the day. Their
heronries are usually located in swamps, and preferably in coniferous
trees. A visit to one of these is very interesting, but old clothes must
be worn, for their homes are filthy. On your approach, the old birds
flap away, and circle about with squawks of disapproval, and all the
young birds commence a loud ticking noise, like what would be produced
by hundreds of huge “grandfather’s clocks.”

Notes.—A harsh “quark.”

Nest.—A platform of sticks; eggs pale bluish-green. (2.00 × 1.40).

Range.—Breeds north to New Brunswick and Manitoba; winters in the Gulf
States and southward.

[Illustration: ]


                       YELLOW-CROWNED NIGHT HERON
                203.     Nyctanassa violacea.     23 in.

Like the last species, the head of this one is adorned with three long,
rounded, white plumes; in life these plumes are rarely separated, but
are nested together so that there appears to be but one. As dusk
approaches, these birds sally out from their roosting or nesting places,
and with slow, measured flaps, wing their way to their feeding grounds,
which are usually fresh water bogs, teeming with animal and insect life.
After dark the “quark” of Night Herons is frequently heard as the birds
pass overhead, and they can very easily be decoyed by a crude imitation
of their call. This species is principally confined to the South where
it is found in heronries of its own kind, or in company with others.

Notes.—Like those of the Black-crowned Night Heron.

Nest.—A platform of sticks in trees, in swamps. 3 or 4 pale bluish-green
eggs (2.00 × 1.40); May.

Range.—Breeds north to South Carolina and Southern Illinois; later may
stray farther north.

[Illustration: ]


                  CRANES, RAILS, ETC.—Order Paludicolæ
                          CRANES—Family Gruidæ


                             WHOOPING CRANE
                  204.     Grus americana.     50 in.

Plumage white, with black primaries; the inner wing feathers greatly
lengthened, making a flowing train. Head of adult, largely bare, carmine
colored, and with a few black hair-like feathers; eye yellow; bill and
legs black. Young birds are whitish, mixed with gray. These great birds
are not uncommon on the prairies of interior America, where they
frequent the edges of marshes and sloughs. They are very wary and their
great height enables them to see anyone a long way off, above the marsh
grass. They were formerly found on the South Atlantic coast, but are now
extremely rare there.

Notes.—A loud whooping scream.

Nest.—On the ground, usually in marshes; it is a bulky mass of grass and
weeds, with the hollowed top a foot or more above ground. The two eggs
that they lay are brownish-buff, spotted with brown (3.75 × 2.50); May,
June.

[Illustration: ]


                           LITTLE BROWN CRANE
                  205.     Grus canadensis.     36 in.

Like the next and better known species, but smaller and browner,
especially on the wings.

Range.—Breeds in the interior of Northern Canada; migrates, west of the
Mississippi and east of the Rockies, to Mexico.


                             SANDHILL CRANE
                   206.     Grus mexicana.     44 in.

Plumage entirely grayish with a few brownish feathers; bare skin on top
of head, red. These cranes are locally distributed in the Gulf States,
and in the interior north to Manitoba. Their food consists largely of
grasshoppers, worms and lizards. Unlike herons, their young are born
covered with down and can run about as soon as they appear. When flying,
cranes carry their neck full outstretched.

Nest.—On the ground like that of the Whooping Crane.

Range.—Winters on the Gulf coast and in Florida; breeds north to
Manitoba.

[Illustration: ]


                        COURLANS—Family Aramidæ


                                LIMPKIN
                 207.     Aramus vociferus.     27 in.

These singular birds are the connecting link between the cranes and the
rails. They are rarely seen in flocks, usually living a secluded life in
pairs. They are often known as the “crying bird,” because of the
peculiar wailing cries that they utter, both in daytime and after
nightfall. They are great skulkers, and it is difficult to make them
fly; when they do take wing, it is only to go a few rods before dropping
into the shelter of the reeds again. They can run rapidly, having a
peculiar mincing gait, that is said to have given them the name of
Limpkin.

Notes.—A peculiar wailing “whee-ee-eu.”

Nest.—A loosely constructed platform of sticks, leaves, grass and moss,
located a few feet from the ground in tangled underbrush or vines. The 4
to 7 eggs are buffy white, blotched with brown (2.30 × 1.70); April,
May.

Range.—Breeds and is resident in Southern Florida, and casually Texas.

[Illustration: ]


               RAILS, GALLINULES AND COOTS—Family Rallidæ


                               KING RAIL
                  208.     Rallus elegans.     18 in.

Back handsomely patterned with black, olive-brown and gray; wing coverts
reddish-brown; neck and breast, rich cinnamon-brown, brightest on the
breast. Sides sharply barred with black and white. This species is the
handsomest of the rails, and is the most distinctly and brightly marked.
They are excellent runners and are very difficult to start from the
marsh grass within which they are concealed. They are usually found in
fresh water marshes, while the next species is most abundant in salt
marshes; they are both often found in the same place and must be seen at
close range to distinguish them.

Notes.—A loud “bup, bup, bup” repeated and ending in a roll. (Chapman).

Nest.—Of grass and weeds on the ground in marshes. The eggs are pale
buff, spotted with reddish-brown (1.6 × 1.2); June.

Range.—Breeds from the Gulf coast north to Conn., Ont., and Minn.
Winters in southern U. S.

[Illustration: ]


                              CLAPPER RAIL
                 211.     Rallus crepitans.     15 in.

General color above olive-grayish, with no strong black markings; breast
pale brown; flanks barred with gray and white. This species is found
almost exclusively in salt marshes, where they skulk about like rats.
During exceptionally high tides, when their hiding places are covered,
many of them are killed by negroes and white men for food; they can
swim, but usually run across the marsh, making use of blades of grass,
sticks or whatever trash may be in their course, as stepping stones.

Notes.—Loud and clacking like those of the King Rail.

Nest.—Of grasses on the ground in salt marshes; 6 to 14 buffy eggs,
spotted with brown (1.70 × 1.20).

Range.—Salt marshes of the Atlantic coast, north to Mass. The following
subspecies are darker and very locally distributed. 211a, Louisiana
Clapper (R. c. saturatus), coast of La. 211b, Scott Clapper (R. c.
scotti), Gulf coast of Fla. 211c, Wayne Clapper (R. e. waynei), east
coast of Fla. to S. C.

[Illustration: ]


                             VIRGINIA RAIL
                212.     Rallus virginianus.     9.5 in.

Coloration almost exactly like that of the King Rail, but the bird is
much smaller. Like that species, this one prefers fresh water marshes.
They have a great aversion to flying, and, like other rails, will trust
to their legs for safety, should danger threaten; probably no other
birds are as dexterous as the rails in threading their way through the
close standing rushes. Although they do not have webbed feet, they can
swim fairly well, and also dive, but they do so only when they are
forced to. They look extremely awkward as they run over the trash on the
marsh, their head and neck erect and extended, with their head rapidly
turning from side to side as though looking for a place of safety.

Notes.—A guttural, rattling “cut-cut-cut-ee.”

Nest.—Of grasses, on the ground or in tufts of rushes; eggs
creamy-white, specked with brown (1.25 × .90); May, June.

Range.—Breeds in the northern half of the United States and southern
Canada; winters in southern U. S.

[Illustration: ]


                          CAROLINA RAIL; SORA
                 214.     Porzana Carolina.     8.5 in.

Adults with the face and throat black. Young with no black on the head.
This species is not apt to be confused with any, except, possibly, the
Virginia Rail, which is somewhat larger, and always has the breast
conspicuously cinnamon color. These birds are very abundant in nearly
their whole range, but they are so secretive in their habits that their
presence is often not noticed. Unless disturbed, they pass the greater
portion of the day in slumber, and do most of their feeding after dusk,
when their confused, clucking notes are heard all over the marshes. All
of the rails have this habit of feeding chiefly at night, perhaps
through fear of enemies during the daytime, for they seem to be very
timid birds.

Notes.—A rapid clucking, “kuk, kuk, kuk,” etc.

Nest.—A rude structure of grass and rushes on the ground in either salt
or fresh marshes; 6 to 16 buff colored eggs with reddish brown specks.

Range.—Breeds in the northern half of the U. S. and northwards; winters
in the southern half.

[Illustration: ]


                              YELLOW RAIL
             215.     Coturnicops noveboracensis.     7 in.

This is a handsome bird, the entire plumage having a glossy lustre. The
back is blackish, with all the feathers edged with white, while the
head, neck and breast have a peculiar yellowish-brown shade.

Nest.—On the ground; made of rushes and grass woven and twisted
together; the 6 to 12 eggs are rich buff color, specked in a wreath
about the large end, with reddish-brown; size 1.10 × .80; June.

Range.—Breeds in northern U.S. and southern Canada; winters in the
southern states.


                               BLACK RAIL
               216.     Creciscus jamaicensis.     5 in.

Much smaller than any of our other rails; very dark.

Notes.—A peculiar, loud clicking sound.

Nest.—Of grass and rushes, well cupped to receive the 6 to 12 eggs;
these are creamy white, speckled with reddish brown (1.03 × .75); June.

Range.—Breeds in the United States north to Mass., southern Minn, and
Oregon. Winters in the West Indies and Central America.

[Illustration: ]


                            PURPLE GALLINULE
                218.     Ionornis martinicus.     13 in.

Bill shorter and stouter than that of the rails, and with a hard shield
at the base, that extends on the forehead to the top of the head. This
species is beautifully colored with purplish-red and blue on the
underparts, and greenish on the back and wings; legs yellow; bill
carmine, tipped with yellow. The habits of the gallinules are
practically the same as those of the rails. They inhabit marshes, where
they creep cautiously but rapidly through the upright stalks, or run
over the slimy surface, where none but birds with extremely long toes
could get a foothold. Their powers of flight are weak, and they do not
take wing unless they are cornered or wish to cross some stream.

Nest.—Woven of grasses and rushes, and placed either on the ground or
attached to living rushes, usually over the water; their 5 to 10 eggs
are rich cream color, spotted with reddish brown (1.60 × 1.15).

Range.—Breeds in eastern United States, north to North Carolina and
southern Illinois; winters south of the U. S.

[Illustration: ]


                           FLORIDA GALLINULE
                 219.     Gallinula galeata.     13 in.

Bill and crown plate, red, tipped with yellow; legs greenish with a red
ring around the top; plumage gray changing to blackish on the head and
neck. Florida Gallinules are very noisy, especially during the mating
and breeding season, and marshes in the south, where they breed by
hundreds, fairly ring with their cries chuckles and squawks. They have
an almost endless variety of notes but all of them are harsh and
explosive. At times they appear to be stupid, and allow anyone to
approach in a boat, near enough to touch them with an oar. When
frightened, and with no protecting rushes to conceal them, they will
rush off over the grass and water, with much spattering and squawking.

Nest.—Usually fastened in the marsh grass or flags above water; made of
rushes and grass; the eggs are similar to those of the Purple Gallinule
but are duller.

Range.—Breeds north to southern New England, Ontario, Minnesota and
Oregon; winters in southern U. S.

[Illustration: ]


                             AMERICAN COOT
                 221.     Fulica americana.     15 in.

Bill and frontal shield as in the gallinules, but the bill is whitish
with a blackish ring near the tip; each individual toe is furnished with
a large scalloped web; otherwise their plumage is grayish like that of
the Florida Gallinule. Coots are, locally, very abundant throughout
temperate North America in summer. Like gallinules, they inhabit reedy
pools, sluggish streams and boggy marshes, where they are at least safe
from human pursuit. They conceal themselves among the reeds, so as to
escape observation, taking wing only when they are obliged to. They are
expert swimmers, and can dive and swim for long distances under water;
in this respect they have a decided advantage over the rails and
gallinules.

Nest.—Like that of the gallinules; 6 to 15 grayish eggs, finely speckled
with black (1.80 × 1.30). May, June.

Range.—Breeds throughout temperate America, rare on the North Atlantic
coast; winters in southern U. S.

[Illustration: ]


                       SHORE BIRDS—Order Limicolæ
                    PHALAROPES—Family Phalaropodidæ


                             RED PHALAROPE
               222.     Phalaropus fulicarius.     8 in.

Bill heavier than any of the other phalaropes; feet lobate-webbed.
Adults in summer have the entire underparts reddish brown; side of head
white; upper parts gray, white and black. In winter, head and underparts
are white; back gray. Phalaropes differ from any other of our birds, in
that the female is the larger and brighter plumaged bird, and the duties
of incubation are largely or chiefly performed by the male bird. These
phalaropes are very rarely seen in the United States in their breeding
plumage; when they come in the Fall, nearly all have changed to their
dull winter dress, and they keep this until after they leave us in the
Spring.

Nest.—A hollow in the ground, lined with a few grasses; eggs greenish
buff, spotted with blackish.

Range.—Breeds in the Arctic regions; winters south to New York, Calif.,
and Ohio, chiefly on the sea coasts.

[Illustration: ]


                           NORTHERN PHALAROPE
                 223.     Lobipes lobatus.     7.5 in.

Bill short and slender. Female in summer with reddish-brown breast; gray
upper parts mixed with white and buff; throat and belly, white. Male,
similar but duller colored. In winter, the upper parts are gray mixed
with white, and the underparts are pure white. This is a maritime
species that nests in the far north, and appears on our coast only for a
short time during migrations. Like the last, they are expert swimmers
and pass most of their time, when not breeding, upon the surface of the
water, where they can outride the most severe storms in safety. They
feed upon minute insects that they secure from beds of floating kelp.

Notes.—A sharp, rapidly repeated, metallic “tweet.”

Nest.—A grass-lined hollow in the ground; eggs greenish-buff, spotted
with black (1.30 × .90).

Range.—Breeds from Labrador, Hudson Bay and Alaska northward. Winters
south of the United States, migrating along both coasts, and to some
extent in the interior.

[Illustration: ]


                            WILSON PHALAROPE
                224.     Steganopus tricolor.     9 in.

Bill long and slender. Female in summer with a black line through eye,
shading into a broad stripe of rich chestnut on the sides of the neck.
Male much duller colored and slightly smaller. This phalarope is one of
the most beautiful of all our shore birds, and is the most southerly
distributed of the phalaropes. It is a bird of the interior, and is only
rarely or casually met with on the sea coasts. It commonly travels about
in small companies instead of large flocks as the other two species do,
and is not as often seen on the water, although it can swim well.

Notes.—Usually silent, but has a low quack.

Nest.—Of grasses, on the ground, usually concealed in a tuft of grass,
and near the border of a marsh or pond; the 3 or 4 eggs are brownish or
greenish-buff with black markings (1.30 × .90); June.

Range.—Breeds chiefly in the interior, from Iowa and California, north
to Hudson Bay; winters south of the U. S.

[Illustration: ]


               AVOCETS AND STILTS—Family Recurvirostridæ


                            AMERICAN AVOCET
              225.     Recurvirostra americana.     17 in.

Bill slender and recurved; feet webbed; feathers on the underparts very
thick and duck-like, being impervious to water. In summer, the head and
neck are pale cinnamon color; young birds and winter adults have the
head and neck white, but the rest of the plumage is the same as in
summer. These interesting waders are very abundant in some localities on
the western plains. During the breeding season, if not molested, they
become very tame; at other times they are quite wary. Their food
consists of water insects and small Crustacea, which they secure in a
novel manner. Wading along in shallow water, with their head immersed,
they keep their bill moving from side to side through the soft mud.

Nest.—Of grass, on the ground; the eggs are brownish-buff spotted with
black (1.90 × 1.30); May, June.

Range.—Breeds locally from Texas and southern California northward to
Saskatchewan; rare or casual east of the Miss, and on the Atlantic
coast.

[Illustration: ]


                           BLACK-NECKED STILT
               226.     Himantopus mexicanus.     15 in.

Legs extremely long, and bright red; neck and bill moderately long and
slender. Male black and white as shown; female and young with the back
brownish. These very long-legged creatures are found in suitable places
west of the Mississippi River, and are especially abundant in southern
California. Stilts are poor swimmers, but habitually feed in
comparatively deep water, that is up to their bodies, their whole head,
neck and upper parts of the body often being submerged while thus
engaged. They are strong and swift on the wing, twisting as they fly, so
as to alternately show their black upper parts, then the white surfaces
beneath; this is a habit that is common to several varieties of shore
birds.

Nest.—On the ground as usual; eggs greenish-buff, spotted with black
(1.80 × 1.25); May, June.

Range.—Breeds in the Gulf states and southern California, north to
Dakota; winters south of U. S., except in southern California. Rare on
the Atlantic coast.

[Illustration: ]


              SNIPES, SANDPIPERS, ETC.—Family Scolopacidæ


                           AMERICAN WOODCOCK
                  228.     Philohela minor.     11 in.

Bill very long; eyes very large and located near the top of the head;
form heavy; legs short; plumage much mottled with black, brown and gray.
These peculiar birds are very well known throughout their range, to
gunners and sportsmen, who have been the means of almost completely
exterminating them in some localities. They are found in runs along the
edges of brooks, where the mud is soft. Their food is of worms, insects
and their larvæ, which they get from the ground by boring with their
long bills. Their flight is very rapid, and when startled they double
and twist in their haste to get away, their three narrow outer wing
feathers producing a peculiar whistling sound.

Notes.—A low peep, and a twittering.

Nest.—Simply a hollow amid the surrounding leaves; the 4 eggs are buff,
with yellowish-brown spots (1.50 × 1.15); April, May.

Range.—Eastern N. A., breeding chiefly from Ohio and New Jersey,
northward; winters in southern U. S.

[Illustration: ]


                              WILSON SNIPE
                230.     Gallinago delicata.     11 in.

Bill very long, but not as heavy as that of the Woodcock; eyes not
abnormally large; head striped with black and whitish; back handsomely
variegated with black, brown and white; sides barred with black and
white. The Snipe frequents more open country than the Woodcock, being
found in marshes or along open brooks. Like the Woodcock, they often lie
still and trust to their colors to prevent their being seen, but if they
are observed, and they are always on the alert, they instantly take wing
and pursue a zigzag course out of sight. Like the last species they
procure their food by boring, the tip of the bill being flexible, so
they can grasp their food when they feel it.

Notes.—A sharp, harsh whistle as they take wing.

Nest.—Depressions in the grassy edges of ponds or marshes; eggs olive
gray, marked with blackish (1.50 × 1.10); May, June.

Range.—Breeds from the northern tier of states northward. Winters in
southern U. S.

[Illustration: ]


                               DOWITCHER
              231.     Macrorhamphus griseus.     10.5 in.

Bill very long like that of the Snipe. Adults in summer are
reddish-brown below, more or less specked with black on the breast and
barred with black on the sides; above mottled with brown and black,
lighter, or even white, on the rump. In winter, they are gray above and
white below, the breast being tinged with gray and streaked with dusty.
Dowitchers are known as Red-breasted Snipe and as Robin Snipe by
gunners, with whom they are great favorites. They usually travel in
flocks, and often with flocks of other species. Their notes are a series
of musical whistles, easily imitated, and the birds are easily attracted
thereby.

Nest.—As usual on the ground; eggs greenish-buff, spotted.

Range.—Eastern N. A., breeding in the Arctic regions; winters south of
the U. S.

232. LONG-BILLED DOWITCHER (M. scolopaceus), is found in western N. A.
The bill is supposed to be longer, but the plumage is identical and the
birds probably are.

[Illustration: ]


                            STILT SANDPIPER
              233.     Micropalama himantopus.     8.5 in.

Bill slender and only moderately long. In summer, the entire underparts
are rusty-white, barred with blackish; ear-coverts and top of head
browner; back mixed brown and black. In winter, they are gray above and
whitish below, with the breast streaked with dusty. They seem to be one
of the least abundant of our shore birds, single individuals being found
in flocks of other species, rather than in flocks of themselves. They
are usually more shy than the birds with which they are associated,
perhaps because they lack companionship of their own kind. They have a
musical whistle, not distinctive from that of many others of our small
shore birds.

Nest.—The three or four eggs are laid in a hollow in the ground, usually
in the grass back from the beach; eggs grayish, blotched with various,
shades of brown.

Range.—Eastern North America, breeding in the Arctic regions and
migrating through the United States to South America, chiefly on the
Atlantic coast.

[Illustration: ]


                                  KNOT
                 234.     Tringa canutus.     10.5 in.

Bill moderately long and quite stout; form more robust than most of our
shore birds. Adults in summer, mixed brownish and gray, above, and
uniform reddish-brown below. In winter, plain gray above and white
below; young similar but with feathers on the back edged with white. It
is an abundant species on the Atlantic coast during migrations, and is
known by various names such as Red-breasted Sandpiper and Robin Snipe,
when in summer dress, and as Gray-back when in winter plumage. It is
usually found on the ocean beach, where it follows the waves as they
recede, picking up numerous insects left there, and retreating before
the next wave.

Notes.—An ordinary Sandpiper whistle.

Nest.—Not positively known, but a supposed egg obtained by Lieutenant
Greely in the vicinity of Fort Conger was pea-green in color, with small
brown spots. (1.10 × 1.00).

Range.—Breeds in the Arctic regions; migrates chiefly on the Atlantic
coast, to South America.

[Illustration: ]


                            PURPLE SANDPIPER
                235.     Arquatella maritima.     9 in.

Upper parts blackish, margined with buffy; breast and sides slaty
purple. In winter, blackish, without the rusty edging to the feathers.
These dark colored little sandpipers prefer bold rocky coasts.

Notes.—A loud, shrill whistle.

Nest.—A hollow in the ground, among grass and weeds, lined with a few
grasses; eggs grayish buff, handsomely splashed with various shades of
brown.

Range.—Breeds from northern Labrador and the mouth of Hudson Bay
northward; winters south to Long Island Sound and the Great Lakes.


                           PECTORAL SANDPIPER
                  239.     Pisobia maculata.     9 in.

Crown and back blackish, strongly edged with reddish-brown; an ashy-gray
wash on the breast, with numerous streaks of blackish. Well known and
called by a great variety of names, of which Jack Snipe and Grass Snipe
are probably the most common.

Range.—Breeds in the Arctic regions; migrates through the U. S. to South
America.

[Illustration: ]


                         WHITE-RUMPED SANDPIPER
               240.     Pisobia fuscicollis.     7.5 in.

Upper tail coverts white; below white, but with the throat and breast
streaked with dusky, these markings extending on the sides to the tail.

Notes.—Musical whistles in no way different from those of the Least
Sandpiper.

Nest.—On the ground, in grass back of beaches; eggs gray, profusely
blotched with blackish brown.

Range.—Eastern N. A., breeding from Labrador and Hudson Bay northward;
migrates through the U. S. east of the Rockies, to southern South
America.


                            BAIRD SANDPIPER
                  241.     Pisobia bairdi.     7.5 in.

Of the same, size, form and general coloration as the White-rumped
Sandpiper, but the upper tail-coverts are blackish, and the breast is
only very faintly streaked.

Range.—Breeds in the Arctic regions, and migrates chiefly through the
interior, but to some extent on the coast, south to southern South
America.

[Illustration: ]


                            LEAST SANDPIPER
                 242.     Pisobia minutilla.     6 in.

Smallest of our sandpipers. Upperparts blackish, edged with bright
chestnut; breast and sides ashy-gray, conspicuously streaked with dusky.

Notes.—A musical whistle, “peet-weet.”

Nest.—A grass lined hollow; eggs grayish, heavily blotched with blackish
brown (1.15 × .80).

Range.—Breeds from Nova Scotia and northern British Columbia northward;
winters from the Gulf States and California southward.


                         SEMIPALMATED SANDPIPER
               246.     Ereunetes pusillus.     6.25 in.

Feet with small webs between the toes at their base. Similar in size and
form to the Least Sandpiper, but the upper parts are not as bright
rusty, and the breast is only faintly streaked with dusky.

Range.—Breeds from Labrador northward.

247. WESTERN SANDPIPER (E. mauri) is very similar; more rusty above,
with stronger markings.

[Illustration: ]


                          RED-BACKED SANDPIPER
              243.     Pelidna alpina sakhalina.     8 in.

Bill slightly decurved and rather stout. Adults in summer, with the
upper parts largely bright rusty; belly black; head, throat, breast and
sides strongly streaked with black. In winter, dull brownish-gray above
and white below, with the breast washed with grayish and slightly
streaked with dusky. Found in large flocks on both the Atlantic and
Pacific coasts, during migrations, but rarely in the interior. Their
flight is very rapid and performed in very compact flocks that act as if
governed by one impulse. They are very active, feeding for a short time
in one place, then flying to another. They are found most abundantly on
sand bars and mud flats, rather than on the open beach.

Nest.—Usually on dry, grassy knolls, a hollow in the earth being lined
with a few dried grasses. Eggs pale greenish or brownish gray, spotted
with blackish (1.40 × 1.00); June.

Range.—Breeds in the Arctic regions, and winters from the Gulf coast and
southern California, southward.

[Illustration: ]


                               SANDERLING
                 248.     Calidris leucophæa.     8 in.

Toes short and stout; no hind toe. Adults in summer, variegated above
with bright reddish-brown and black; below white, the breast being
strongly washed with rusty and spotted with black. In winter, plain
grayish above and white below; head white, except the crown; young birds
are like winter adults but have the back with some blackish. In the
interior this species is found on the edges of lakes and rivers. On the
coast, it is one of the boldest of the shore birds, feeding on the edge
of the outer beach, often under the combing crest of the incoming waves,
retreating just as the wave breaks and is dashed to foam on the beach.
They are usually wary and will not allow a close approach.

Nest.—On the ground; eggs greenish-buff, spotted with black.

Range.—Breeds in the Arctic regions; winters south to Patagonia,
migrating on both coasts and to a less extent in the interior.

[Illustration: ]


                             MARBLED GODWIT
                   249.     Limosa fedoa.     19 in.

Bill long and slightly recurved. Back, wings and tail, rufous, barred
with black; rump usually white, with black bars; underparts pale rufous
with narrow bars; head grayish, with black streaks on the crown and
sides. Young similar, but whiter below and with few or no bars. These
large waders are found in moderately large flocks both in the interior
and on the coast in the fall. They frequent salt marshes on the coast,
and the borders of ponds and lakes in the interior. They are much hunted
and are consequently very wary, usually taking wing as soon as anyone
appears in sight. They are readily decoyed, and thousands perish
annually at the hands of sportsmen. They are known by many names, Marlin
and Straight-bill Curlew probably being the most commonly used.

Range.—Breeds in the interior from Iowa north to Saskatchewan. Winters
south of the U. S., migrating along both coasts as well as in the
interior.

[Illustration: ]


                            HUDSONIAN GODWIT
                 251.     Limosa hæmastica.     15 in.

Bill slightly recurved; tail black at the end, and white at the base,
not barred as that of the last species always is. Above blackish, with
rusty margins; below deep reddish-chestnut, barred, chiefly on the
sides, with black. In winter, similar but duller both above and below,
with only traces of bars on the flanks, and with the breast more or less
streaked. This species is more abundant on the Atlantic coast during
migrations than the last. It is most often known as the Ring-tailed
Marlin, owing to a very strong contrast between the black tail, white
rump and dark upper parts as the bird flies. They are usually found in
the marshes back of the ocean beach, and, owing to their large size, can
be seen for a long distance.

Notes.—A loud, shrill Whistle.

Nest.—A grass lined hollow in marshes; eggs brownish buff, blotched with
blackish (2.20 × 1.40).

Range.—Breeds in the Arctic regions; winters south of the United States,
migrating chiefly on the Atlantic coast, but to some extent down the
Miss. Valley.

[Illustration: ]


                          GREATER YELLOW-LEGS
               254.     Totanus melanoleucus.     14 in.

Bill long and rather slender; legs long and yellow or greenish yellow.
Head and neck streaked with gray and white; back black margined with
white; rump white; tail barred black and white; underparts white, washed
with gray on the breast; and with numerous black arrow-head markings. In
winter, similar, but with no black markings below.

Notes.—A loud three-syllabled whistle.

Range.—Breeds from northern portion of Miss. Valley in the U. S.
northward; winters from the Gulf States and southern California
southward.


                           LESSER YELLOW-LEGS
                255.     Totanus flavipes.     10.5 in.

Very similar in form, color and markings to the large Yellow-legs, but
smaller in every way.

Range.—Breeds in the interior of Canada, north to the Arctic Ocean, and
possibly in northern Miss. Valley. Winters from the Gulf States
southward, migrating in the interior and along the Atlantic coast.

[Illustration: ]


                           SOLITARY SANDPIPER
              256.     Helodromas solitarius.     8.5 in.

Above olive-grayish, streaked on the head and neck, and sharply speckled
on the back and wings, with white; tail sharply barred with black and
white; below white, streaked on the breast and barred on the sides with
gray and white. In winter, with fewer white markings on the back. It is
often confused with the Spotted Sandpiper that frequents the same
places, but should be easily identified when it flies by its barred tail
and linings of the wings. They have the habit, common to nearly all the
shore birds, of elevating their wings after alighting, and then
carefully folding them on the back.

Nest.—For a long time their eggs were unknown, but are now known to be
laid in the nests of other land birds, at low elevations in trees or
bushes near water. They have been found in Manitoba in a Waxwing’s nest.
Eggs bluish-green with blackish-brown blotches.

Range.—Breeds from Northern U. S. northward; winters south of the U. S.

[Illustration: ]


                                 WILLET
            258.     Catophophorus semipalmatus.     16 in.

Bill long and quite stout; feet with small webs between the bases of the
toes. Upper parts brownish-gray, more or less speckled with black; most
of secondaries and bases of primaries white, very conspicuous in flight,
and easily distinguishing it from any other wader of its size. Usually
found in small flocks along the edges of marshes; they are said to be
quite shy except during nesting season, and to be difficult to decoy.
After breeding they wander northward and are often seen in flocks of
other migrating species. When standing on the beach they often indulge
in curious antics, bowing and flirting their tails.

Notes.—A loud, shrill whistle, “pill-will-willet.”

Nest.—On the ground; eggs buffy, blotched with brown.

Range.—Breeds from the Gulf to New Jersey; later strays to Maine. 258a,
Western Willet (S. s. inornata) is supposed to be slightly larger and
paler. Breeds from Texas to Manitoba; winters along the Gulf coast.

[Illustration: ]


                          BARTRAMIAN SANDPIPER
               261.     Bartramia longicauda.     12 in.

Upper parts blackish with greenish-brown edgings; tail brownish with
black bars, and white tips to the outer feathers. Underparts white, with
prominent inverted, black arrow head markings on the breast and along
the sides. These birds are more often known as Upland Plovers, because
they are found on dry hillsides, rarely near water. West of the Miss.
they are said to occur in large flocks in the Fall, but in the East,
half a dozen or so would be considered a fair sized flock. They feed
upon small grasshoppers and other small insects, sometimes chasing them
for a considerable distance before securing them. They are shy and
usually take wing as soon as they see you.

Nest.—Of grasses, usually concealed in clumps of grass or weeds in the
middle of fields; eggs buffy, blotched with yellowish-brown (1.75 ×
1.25); May, June.

Range.—Breeds locally in the northern half of the United States and
Southern Canada; winters south of the U. S.

[Illustration: ]


                        BUFF-BREASTED SANDPIPER
              262.     Tryngites subruficollis.     8 in.

Bill short and slender. General color above, blackish-brown margined
with tawny; underparts buffy, with a few black specks on the sides of
the breast. Primaries blackish-brown on the outer webs, the inner webs,
as well as those of the secondaries, being whitish, peculiarly speckled
with black; these markings are characteristic and are found on no other
of our shore birds. It seems to be most nearly related to the last
species, and like that, is often found on hillsides at a distance from
water.

Notes.—A low, weak “tweet.”

Nest.—A scantily lined depression on the ground; the four eggs are
grayish-buff, boldly blotched with rich chestnut-brown and black (1.45 ×
1.05); June.

Range.—Breeds in Arctic America; winters in South America, migrating
chiefly through the interior of the United States, but to a less degree
on the coast.

[Illustration: ]


                           SPOTTED SANDPIPER
                263.     Actitis macularia.     7.5 in.

Below white, with round blackish spots, heaviest on the breast and
sides; above olive-brown or gray, with faint black bars; a narrow black
line from the bill through the eye to the ears. Young entirely white
below, with the breast faintly tinged with gray. These birds are
abundant and breed locally throughout the United States and the greater
part of Canada. One or more pairs will usually be found nesting in the
fields about all small ponds, or among the weeds that grow about edges
of pools and lakes. They have a peculiar habit of “teetering,” whether
standing still or while feeding on the banks of streams or ponds; other
birds do this but not nearly as persistently as Spotted Sandpipers.

Notes.—A clear “peet-weet;” also a single melodious whistle.

Nest.—On the ground in fields or near the edges of pools or streams;
eggs buffy, boldly spotted.

Range.—Breeds from the Gulf to Hudson Bay; winters south of the U. S.

[Illustration: ]


                           LONG-BILLED CURLEW
                264.     Numenius americanus.     23 in.

Bill much decurved and very long (4 to 8 in.), the longest of any of our
shore birds. Plumage variegated with rufous and blackish above; bright
buffy or rufous below, streaked on neck and breast, and barred on the
sides with blackish. “Sickle-bills,” as these birds are often called,
are the largest of our shore birds. They are very conspicuous either
when flying or walking on the marshes or sandbars, their size appearing
gigantic when they are in a flock of smaller plover, as sometimes
happens. They fly in compact flocks, evidently led by one individual,
for they wheel and circle in perfect unison, sailing up in the wind on
outspread wings, when about to alight.

Notes.—A flute-like whistle, “ker-loo.”

Nest.—On the ground; eggs greenish-buff, with small black spots over the
whole surface (2.50 × 1.80).

Range.—Breeds in the Upper Miss. Valley, north to Manitoba; winters in
the Gulf States, and southward; formerly bred on the South Atlantic
coast; strays to New England and New Brunswick in the fall.

[Illustration: ]


                            HUDSONIAN CURLEW
                265.     Numenius hudsonicus.     17 in.

Darker brown above, than the Sickle-bill; crown broadly striped with
blackish and buff; underparts grayish, streaked on the breast and barred
on the sides with blackish. This and the succeeding species are summer
inhabitants of the Arctic regions, being found within our borders only
for a short time in the Fall and Spring. It is found in fresh and salt
water marshes, as well as on mud-flats and on sandy beaches of the
seashore. They are very unsuspicious and are easily stalked, or decoy
very easily, coming to wooden caricatures of themselves stuck up in the
mud, or to crude imitations of their whistles; consequently large
numbers of them are shot and they are becoming scarce.

Notes.—Similar to that of the last.

Nest.—Hollows in the ground, lined with grasses and weeds; eggs buffy,
blotched with brownish-black (2.25 × 1.60).

Range.—Breeds in the Arctic regions. Winters south of the United States,
migrating both on the coast and in the interior.

[Illustration: ]


                             ESKIMO CURLEW
                266.     Numenius borealis.     13.5 in.

Bill comparatively short (about 2 in.) and little curved. Above, marked
similarly to the last; below white or pale buff, often thickly covered
on the breast and sides with streaks and arrow head markings of
blackish. Primaries and most of the secondaries plain brownish-black,
without the variegation of the last species. A few years ago this was
considered the most abundant of the curlews, but so persistently have
they been hunted that they are now practically exterminated. When it
comes to looking after their safety, curlews are, perhaps, the most
stupid of the shore birds for they do not seem to realize the dangerous
character of mankind in general, and they have paid the penalty. I trust
that all sportsmen will refrain from shooting these birds.

Nest.—Like that of the Hudsonian; eggs similar but smaller.

Range.—Eastern N. A., breeding in the Arctic regions and migrating
through the Plains, Mississippi Valley, and to a less extent on the
Atlantic coast, to South America. Very rare now anywhere.

[Illustration: ]


                       PLOVERS—Family Charadriidæ


                          BLACK-BELLIED PLOVER
              270.     Squatarola squatarola.     11.5 in.

Hind toe very small. Bill short and stout. Adults in summer with the
back, wings and tail barred or marked with black and white; top of head
and nape white, except for a few black markings on the crown; face,
throat, breast and fore part of belly, black. In winter, brownish-black,
somewhat mottled, above; below dull white. Young similar to winter
adults, but the back is spotted with yellowish-white. While these
handsome plover migrate to some extent, and sometimes in large flocks,
through the interior of the United States, they are chiefly and most
abundantly found on the coast. They are the plover most eagerly sought
by gunners.

Call.—A plaintive whistle, “ter-lee.”

Nest.—Grass-lined hollows in marshes or dry land, back from the beach;
eggs greenish-buff, spotted with black.

Range.—Breeds in the Arctic regions; winters in South America, migrating
through the U. S. in Sept. and May.

[Illustration: ]


                         AMERICAN GOLDEN PLOVER
              272.     Charadrius dominicus.     10.5 in.

No hind toe. Back and tail mottled with black and yellow; below, more or
less entirely black to the tail. Young and winter adults, more or less
spotted with yellow and blackish-brown above, and grayish-white below,
with indistinct streaks on the breast. Often confused with the last
species in this plumage, but is smaller, bill smaller and more slender,
and the axillars, or feathers nearest the body, under the wings, are
gray while those of the Black-bellied Plover are black. This species is
now regarded as rare on the North Atlantic coast during migrations,
while in the interior it is more abundant than the last species. They do
not seem to be as suspicious as the Black-bellies, and a flock will
often allow a close approach, even when they see you.

Nest.—Nesting habits like those of the last, and other shore birds; eggs
slightly smaller (1.90 × 1.30).

Range.—Breeds in the Arctic regions; winters south to South America.

[Illustration: ]


                                KILLDEER
                273.     Oxyechus vociferus.     10 in.

No hind toe. Rump and base of tail reddish-brown; breast crossed by two
black bands. Like the Spotted Sandpiper, this bird is locally and
abundantly distributed throughout the United States and Southern Canada;
it is, however, rare in New England, where it is sometimes found in the
Fall. It frequents meadows, fields and ploughed ground, where it feeds
upon insects, and around the edges of pools and streams where it gets
small shellfish and larvæ. As usual, they will attempt to lead an
intruder away from their nest by feigning lameness.

Notes.—A loud, noisy and incessant “killdee.”

Nest.—A slight hollow in the ground, usually in a clump of weeds;
sometimes lined and sometimes not; the four eggs are greenish-buff,
heavily blotched with black.

Range.—Breeds locally throughout United States, except New England, and
southern Canada; winters in southern U. S.

[Illustration: ]


                          SEMIPALMATED PLOVER
               274.     Ægialitis semipalmata.     7 in.

Small web between the bases of the two outer toes. Single broad, black
band across the breast; black line from base of bill to eye. They are
very abundant on our seacoast in Fall, both in flocks composed entirely
of their own kind, and also with Least and Semipalmated Sandpipers. They
usually keep on the inner side of sandbars or muddy flats bordering
marshes, rather than on the open ocean beach. It is also found in
smaller flocks, about ponds and marshes in the interior of the country.
They are usually unsuspicious and will allow a close approach, or if you
are still, will run by within a very few feet.

Notes.—A clear double whistle, usually uttered when on the wing or when
alarmed. They decoy to an imitation of it.

Nest.—On the ground; eggs buffy, sparsely specked with black (1.30 ×
.90); June.

Range.—Breeds from the Gulf of St. Lawrence northward; winters from the
Gulf States southward.

[Illustration: ]


                             PIPING PLOVER
                  277.     Ægialitis meloda.     7 in.

Very pale above; no black in front of eye; black patch on each side of
breast. Young similar, but the black replaced by grayish, as is the case
with the last species. This species, apparently, never could be classed
as abundant and of late years, it is becoming rather rare along our
Atlantic coast; this is probably more due to the building of summer
resorts and homes along their former breeding grounds than to hunters.
They are rather more shy than the last species, but will usually attempt
to escape by running along the beach or by hiding, rather than by
flight. Owing to their light colors it is very difficult to see them at
any distance.

Notes.—A two-syllabled piping whistle.

Nest.—On the ground; eggs buff with fine black specks.

Range.—Breeds on the coast from Va. to Newfoundland and in the
Mississippi Valley.

[Illustration: ]


                              SNOWY PLOVER
                 278.     Ægialitis nivosa.     6.5 in.

Very small and very pale colored. Small black patch on either side of
the breast, on ear coverts, and on crown. Bill more slender but longer
than that of the Piping Plover.

Notes.—Low, mournful, piping whistles.

Range.—United States chiefly west of the Rockies, east to Kansas and
north to Dakota.


                             WILSON PLOVER
              280.     Ochthodromus wilsonius.     7.5 in.

Bill large and heavy for birds of this genus. A black band across the
neck, not extending to the back of the neck; dark line between eye and
bill.

Notes.—A “mixture of whistle and chirp,” very different from that of
allied plovers. (Elliott).

Nest.—A shallow hollow in the sand, sometimes concealed by short beach
grass; eggs grayish, spotted and scratched with blackish brown (1.25 ×
.95).

Range.—Breeds on the Gulf and South Atlantic coasts north to Virginia;
later may stray to Maine.

[Illustration: ]


                            MOUNTAIN PLOVER
                 281.     Podasocys montanus.     9 in.

No black on breast or sides, but with black hand on fop of head and a
black line from bill to eye. Above grayish-brown; below buffy across the
breast, white elsewhere. Mountain or Prairie Plover, as they are often
and better called, are abundant on the western prairies. Like the
Bartramian Sandpiper, they do not frequent the vicinity of water, but
live and get their food in the dry grass-covered districts. They are not
at all shy where they are not hunted. Like all the family, they are very
fleet on foot, and may often be seen chasing grasshoppers or other
active insects. Their flight is very rapid, often devious and usually at
a low elevation.

Notes.—A single, low, musical whistle.

Nest.—A depression in the ground, anywhere on the prairie. Eggs
brownish-gray, blotched with blackish.

Range.—West of the Mississippi River, breeding north to Dakota. Winters
from Southwestern United States southward.

[Illustration: ]


                               TURNSTONE
               283.     Arenaria interpres.     9.75 in.

Very similar to the next, which is the one figured, but slightly larger,
and with black prevailing in the upperparts. This is the Old World
species, found in America only in Labrador and Alaska.


                            RUDDY TURNSTONE
          283.1.     Arenaria interpres morinella.     9.5 in.

Bill short and stout, the upper mandible being straight, so that the
bill has an upturned appearance. Legs reddish on adult birds and orange
on young.

Known by a great many names, referring to its peculiarly pied
appearance:—Calico-bird, Checkered-snipe, etc. An abundant species
usually found on pebbled beaches.

Notes.—One or two clear whistles.

Nest.—A scantily lined hollow; eggs grayish, beautifully marbled with
brown, lilac and blackish.

Range.—Breeds in the Arctic regions; winters in Southern South America,
migrating on both coasts.

[Illustration: ]


                        AMERICAN OYSTER-CATCHER
                286.     Hæmatopus palliatus.     19 in.

Bill very long, heavy, compressed, and thin and chisel-like at the tip.
Bill and eye, red; legs flesh color. These large, awkward looking birds
are not scarce on the South Atlantic coast, where they are met with in
pairs or small companies. They run with great swiftness, or walk
sedately along the beaches and marshes gathering insects and fiddler
crabs, of which they are very fond. They are said to have got their name
from the habit of eating oysters when they found them with the shell
open, a practice that would be extremely hazardous for them to
undertake, as these shellfish close their two valves very quickly and
would be apt to catch the bird. Owing to their large size they are
frequently shot at and, consequently, are usually shy.

Nest.—A depression in the sand; the two or three eggs are buffy, spotted
with blackish-brown (2.20 × 1.50); May.

Range.—Breeds on the coast north to Virginia; later may stray to Nova
Scotia. Winters south of the U. S.

[Illustration: ]


                             MEXICAN JACANA
                   ***     Jacana spinosa.     8 in.

A very peculiar species. Bill plover-like; at the base, terminating in a
leaf-like sheaf that covers the forehead; a hard spur on the shoulder of
each wing; legs and toes extremely long, the toenails being abnormally
so, the hind nail often being an inch and a half long. Young very
different from the adult.—Grayish-brown above, with wings
greenish-yellow as in adult; below whitish, darker across the breast and
on the sides; a light line above the eye. Jacanas are inhabitants of
marshy, muddy pools and ponds, where they can easily run over the
surface, their long toes getting a good foothold on the floating aquatic
plants. They are said to be very pugnacious in defence of their young,
and also to fight among themselves during the mating season.

Nest.—Nests made of weeds and trash, on little floating islands or lily
pads. 3 to 5 olive colored eggs, curiously scrawled with black (1.20 ×
.95); May.

Range.—Is found and breeds within our borders only in Southern Texas.

[Illustration: ]


                 GROUSE, PARTRIDGES, ETC.—Order Gallinæ
                          Family Odontophoridæ


                  BOB-WHITE; QUAIL; VIRGINIA PARTRIDGE
                289.     Colinus virginianus.     10 in.

Male with white throat, bordered with black; female with a
yellowish-brown throat, and line above eye. One of the most popular
“game birds,” so popular that it is exterminated in New England, and
birds imported from the west are unable to regain the lost foothold.
Found in stubble and low brush, where they hide until almost stepped
upon. They feed upon insects and grain.

Notes.—A clear whistled “bob-white” and a series of low, clear whistles
when in flocks.

Nest.—Of grass at the end of tunnel in tall grass bordering fields; 8 to
16 white eggs (1.20 × .95); May.

Range.—Resident east of the Rockies, north to Minn. and Ontario. 289a,
Fla. Bob-white (C. v. floridanus), found in southern Florida, is
extremely dark (shown on plate). 289b, Texan Bob-white (C. v. texanus)
is paler with black areas wider.

[Illustration: ]


                            SCALED PARTRIDGE
                ***     Callipepla squamata.     10 in.

With a whitish or buffy-white crest; plumage bluish-gray, with darker
edges giving the bird the appearance of being covered with scales. The
female is more brownish, but is marked the same as the male. These birds
are locally abundant in arid, cactus-covered deserts, often at a
distance from water, and frequently in company with Gambel Partridge.

Nest.—8 to 15 eggs are laid in some hollow under a low bush or cactus;
they are creamy-white, dotted with minute specks of pale brown (1.25 ×
.95); April, May.

Range.—Mexico north to Central and Western Texas, New Mexico and
Arizona.

293a. Chestnut-bellied Scaled Partridge (C. s. castanogastris), is more
richly colored and has a chestnut patch on the middle of the belly. It
is found in southern Texas and northeastern Mexico.

[Illustration: ]


                            GAMBEL PARTRIDGE
                295.     Lophortyx gambelii.     10 in.

Head with an elegant recurved crest of six or seven feathers; normally
these are carried in one packet so that there appears to be but one
feather, but when excited, or during the mating season, they may
separate the feathers, or sometimes curve them forward so as to touch
the bill. Hindhead and sides chestnut, throat and middle of belly black.
Female with the throat light and hindhead gray; crest small; no black on
belly. An abundant species both in mountains, valleys or deserts, near
or remote from water. Habits like those of the eastern Bob-white, but
instead of taking wing, they will generally run.

Nest.—Eggs laid on the ground under any suitable cover; creamy-white,
handsomely blotched with brown.

Range.—Resident in western Texas, New Mexico and Arizona, north to
southern Utah and Nevada.

[Illustration: ]


                      MEARNS OR MASSENA PARTRIDGE
             296.     Cyrtonyx montezumæ mearnsi.     9 in.

Bill very stout and compressed. Crest large, puffy and flat. Markings on
the male very grotesque and clownish; general color of the female,
pinkish brown with streaks of black, and white specks, below, and barred
and streaked above. These strange birds are very local in their
distribution in the southwest, rare in some localities and occurring in
quite large flocks in others. They are so confiding in their
disposition, that this, in connection with their clownish plumage, has
given them the name of “Fool” Quail. They frequent dry deserts, valleys,
or mountains up to an elevation of at least 8,000 feet. When startled,
they often squat down, and can almost be caught in the hand, but when
they do fly, their flight is very rapid, and accompanied with a peculiar
clucking noise.

Nest.—A depression in the ground, lined with grasses, and concealed in
clumps of weeds or grass. Their eggs, like those of other partridges,
are numerous, pure white, and not as sharply pointed as those of the
Bob-white.

Range.—Western Texas, New Mexico and Arizona.

[Illustration: ]


                              DUSKY GROUSE
               297.     Dendragapus obscurus.     20 in.

Plumage gray, white and black, with a few rusty markings on the back;
wide gray band on tip of tail. Female smaller, browner and more barred
above. These large grouse are found on side hills or in gulches, usually
not far from water. Like our common Ruffed Grouse, during mating season,
the males of this species strut about with tail fully spread over the
back, and head thrown back until it nearly touches the tail. At this
season they are very pugnacious and the woods will resound with their
challenging “toots,”—loud and hollow sounds with a ventriloquial effect.

Nest.—Eggs laid on ground in woods, usually under fallen logs or at the
bases of trees; buffy, sparsely spotted with brown (2.00 × 1.40); May,
June.

Range.—Rocky Mts., from Mexico to Montana and east to South Dakota.
297b., Richardson Grouse (D. o. richardsonii), is found on the eastern
slopes of the Rockies, north to British America. Little or no band on
the tail.

[Illustration: ]


                        HUDSONIAN SPRUCE GROUSE
               298.     Canachites canadensis.     15 in.

Very similar to the next, which is our common species, but the female is
not quite as rusty. Found in Labrador and about Hudson Bay.


                      CANADA GROUSE; SPRUCE GROUSE
                   298c.     C. c. canace.     15 in.

Male black and grayish; female chiefly rusty, barred with black. The
Spruce Grouse is usually found in dense thickets and groves or swamps of
evergreen woods. It is one of the least suspicious of birds, and in
winter, is sometimes knocked down by sticks in the hands of deer
hunters. Their flesh is unfit to eat and consequently they are not
hunted.

Notes.—A drumming, said to be produced by the wings, when in the air; a
clucking by the female.

Nest.—Eggs laid on the ground, usually under low, spreading branches of
spruces; bright buff with bold black blotches (1.70 × 1.25).

Range.—Northern New England, New York and Minnesota, northward.

[Illustration: ]


                             RUFFED GROUSE
                 300.     Bonassa umbellus.     17 in.

Crested and with two large, black, neck-ruffs; plumage brown, black and
white. Female with the ruffs smaller and usually brownish. These grouse
have two color phases, the general tone of plumage being either reddish
brown or gray, independent of age or sex of bird. These naturally wild,
shy grouse are the kings of the eastern game birds, their wariness and
speed with which they will dodge through the trees being the only
reasons they have so long withstood the hunting to which they are
subjected. During spring, the male struts often, tail expanded into a
half circle, head thrown back to meet the upturned tail, and ruff spread
so as to form a complete collar. They make a loud drumming by beating
the air with their wings.

Nest.—Eggs on leaves in the woods; plain brownish-buff (1.55 × 1.15).

Range.—Resident from Va. and Ark. north to southern Canada. 300a.,
Canadian Ruffed Grouse (B. u. togata), is found in the southern British
provinces and northern New England.

[Illustration: ]


                            WILLOW PTARMIGAN
                  301.     Lagopus lagopus.     15 in.

In winter, white with black tail feathers. In summer, usually
reddish-brown with black bars. This species has a much stouter bill than
the next.

Nest.—Eggs laid on the ground. Rich buffy, so heavily blotched and
streaked with black as to nearly conceal it (1.75 × 1.25).

Range.—Breeds in the northern half of Canada, migrating southward to
southern Canada.

301a., Allen Ptarmigan (L. l. alleni), found in Newfoundland, is
similar, but in winter the shafts of the primaries are always black.


                             ROCK PTARMIGAN
                 302.     Lagopus rupestris.     14 in.

In winter, like the last species, except that the bill is smaller, and
the lores are black.

Range.—From the Gulf of St. Lawrence and northern British Columbia
northward. 302a. Reinhardt Ptarmigan, replaces the last variety in
northern Labrador. 303. Welch Ptarmigan (L. welchi), found in
Newfoundland, is said to be grayer in summer.

[Illustration: ]


                      PRAIRIE HEN; PINNATED GROUSE
              305.     Tympanuchus americanus.     18 in.

Tufts of neck feathers rounded or square at the ends, long on the males,
and short on the females. Above, barred with brownish-black and white or
buffy white, the bars being of about equal width; top of head barred
black and grayish. Female differs from the male in having the tail
feathers barred, whereas they are black in the male. Found locally
throughout the prairie regions of the Mississippi Valley north to
Manitoba. Owing to the immense numbers shot for sale in eastern markets,
they have become exterminated in many places where they were formerly
abundant. Male birds have a loose sac or naked skin beneath the tufts of
feathers on the neck; they inflate these to the size of small oranges,
and then produce a loud, hollow, resonant booming sound.

Nest.—Anywhere on the ground on the prairie; eggs olive-buff, finely
specked with brown.

Range.—From La. and Tex. north to Manitoba and Dakota. 305. Attwater
Prairie Hen, smaller and darker, is found in Louisiana and Eastern
Texas.

[Illustration: ]


                               HEATH HEN
                306.     Tympanuchus cupido.     17 in.

Neck feathers pointed; scapulars more broadly tipped with white;
axillars always barred; top of head paler and always brownish. These
differences will always separate this species from the very similar
western bird. They were formerly found throughout Southern New England
and the Middle States, their range meeting that of the Prairie Hen, but
now they are restricted to the island of Martha’s Vineyard, south of
Mass., and probably the true form is extinct there for western birds
have been liberated on the island and interbred with the natives.


                           LESSER PRAIRIE HEN
            307.     Tympanuchus pallidicinctus.     16 in.

Nearest like the prairie hen but paler above, the brown bars being
narrower and lighter colored, but with the edges blackish, giving the
back of the bird a very different appearance from that of the Prairie
Hen. It is found in western Kansas, Indian Territory and Texas.

[Illustration: ]


                      PRAIRIE SHARP-TAILED GROUSE
        308b.     Pediæcetes phasianellus campestris.     18 in.

No pinnates or ruffs on the neck, but the head is crested a little more
than that of the Prairie Hen; tail with the central feathers nearly two
inches longer than the rest, which are also graduated so the outside
ones are much the shortest. Plumage much paler than that of the Prairie
Hen, and feathers on the breast and sides being marked with blackish
loops. Found in more or less abundance on the plains and prairies west
of the Mississippi River. In mating season flocks of them indulge in
curious antics, dancing, ruffling their feathers, and cooing and
crowing.

Nest.—Eggs laid in a hollow in the ground, usually sheltered by a tuft
of grass or bunch of weeds. The eggs are brownish-drab, finely specked,
over the whole surface, with blackish-brown (1.70 × 1.25).

Range.—West of the Miss. River, from New Mexico and Indian Territory
north to Manitoba. 308. Sharp-tailed Grouse, is found in the interior of
British America from Hudson Bay to Alaska. Darker and less rusty than
the preceding.

[Illustration: ]


                              SAGE GROUSE
             309.     Centrocercus urophasianus.     29 in.

The female of this large and very interesting grouse differs from the
male only in its smaller size and paler, duller plumage. They are found
in abundance on the dry sagebrush-covered plains about the Rocky Mts.
and to the westward. In summer they feed largely upon insects and buds
of various plants, but in fall and winter, their food is almost entirely
the leaves of the sagebrush; at this season, in consequence, their flesh
is unfit to eat, so they are not hunted for market, and are able to
pursue a life of quiet as far as man is concerned. In spring, they
indulge in amusing play, as do all the grouse; they have a few wiry
hairs on either side of the neck, covering the naked sacs that
correspond to those of the Prairie Hen; they strut about with these sacs
inflated, and their spread tail, erect, making peculiar buzzing sounds.

Nest.—Eggs laid on the ground under sagebrush; greenish-buff, spotted
rather sparingly with brown.

Range.—Sagebrush covered plains from New Mexico to Southern British
Columbia and Assiniboia.

[Illustration: ]


                           Family Meleagridæ


                              WILD TURKEY
          310.     Meleagres gallopavo silvestris.     48 in.

Female much smaller and duller colored than the male. These fine, large
birds frequent woodlands and borders of streams, where they search
through the underbrush for food in the daytime and sleep in the tallest
trees at night. They are one of the shyest birds, and they have reasons
for being, for they have been hunted until there are none left in New
England and northern Middle States. Wild Turkeys strut and gobble
precisely like domestic ones. Their plumage is more of a coppery bronze
color and their upper tail coverts are rusty, without white edges.

Nest.—Eggs laid on the ground among leaves, usually in dense thickets;
buff, spotted with brown (2.55 × 1.90).

Range.—From Penn. and Ohio south to the Gulf States west to Arkansas.
310b., Florida Wild Turkey, found in Florida, is smaller. 310c., Rio
Grande Turkey, is found in southern Texas; it has upper tail-coverts
edged with buff.

[Illustration: ]


                   RING-NECKED OR MONGOLIAN PHEASANT
                   ***     Phasianus torquatus     ?

The male of this beautiful pheasant varies greatly in length according
to the development of the tail, sometimes being 36 in. in length; the
female averages about 22 in. and is plain colored, but still a very
handsome bird. Males vary greatly in the richness of their colors, and
in the width of the white collar on the neck, the latter depending upon
the extent to which they have been interbred with the English Pheasant,
the latter bird having no white on the neck. These pheasants have been
introduced in Oregon and Washington and are very abundant there now.
Attempts at introducing them in the East have not been as successful,
but in some private preserves they are doing well. They are rather
sluggish in their habits, compared to our Ruffed Grouse, and usually try
to escape by running or hiding rather than by taking wing; when they do
fly, they go in a straight line and rather slowly.

[Illustration: ]


                             FAMILY CRACIDÆ


                               CHACHALACA
              311.     Ortalis vetula mecalli.     21 in.

Plumage olive-brown above, and gray below; head crested; sides of head
and chin, naked, orange-red. These birds are found in southern Texas, in
dense woods, thickets and chaparral. They are very noisy, their calls
being loud, harsh, clackings, “cha-cha-lac,” repeated rapidly and taken
up by all the birds in the neighborhood. They are not usually shy and
are often domesticated. They are also hunted to some extent, but their
flesh is said not to be very good eating, and their body is quite small
compared to the length of the bird.

Nest.—A frail platform of sticks, placed in scrubby brush or bushes, a
few feet above the ground. They lay four white or buffy-white eggs, the
shell of which is very rough and hard (2.25 × 1.55); April.

Range.—Eastern Mexico north to southern Texas.

[Illustration: ]


                    PIGEONS AND DOVES—Order Columbæ
                            Family Columbidæ


                            PASSENGER PIGEON
              315.     Ectopistes migratorius.     16 in.

Head and back bluish-slate; below, rich rusty brown. Only a few years
ago, up to 1880, they were extremely abundant in eastern North America.
Seemingly incredible stories are told of the immense flocks and roosting
places of these birds, and most of them are authentic. It is unfortunate
that the camera was not extensively used then, so we have no visual
records of them. A nesting place in Michigan is described as 28 miles in
length by about four in width, and every tree in the woods, throughout
this whole tract, had several nests, and some were filled with them.
Flocks darkening the sky and covering several square miles are recorded.
And, today, but one or two stragglers are reported in a year, and these
are usually doubtful. They were shot and netted at their roosting and
nesting places, barreled up and sent to market for sale, this continuing
so long as there were birds enough to make it profitable, and we reap
the result—no birds.

[Illustration: ]


                             MOURNING DOVE
          316.     Zenaidura macroura carolinensis.     12 in.

Upperparts olive-brown; below, buffy-gray; a small black mark on the
ears above the iridescent neck patch.

These birds never flock as Passenger Pigeons did, traveling in companies
of six to a dozen, and they have no common nesting or roosting places,
but nest anywhere in the woods, orchards or vines. As they are not often
hunted, they are not shy, and in some localities are very tame,
especially when they are breeding. Their food consists of seeds, grain,
berries and insects, most of which they get from the ground. They nest
either in trees, bushes or on the ground, most often the former. Their
nests are very frail platforms, composed of only a few twigs and
rootlets; when on the ground, usually no nest is made. Their two eggs
are pure white, as are those of all doves. They are loving birds, always
cooing to each other, and are very attentive to their young until they
are full grown.

Range.—Breeds throughout the United States and southern Canada, except
northern New England and the Provinces.

[Illustration: ]


                           WHITE-FRONTED DOVE
        318.     Leptotila fulviventris brachyptera.     12 in.

No black ear-mark; under wing coverts rusty chestnut. Forehead whitish;
all but central pair of tail feathers tipped with white.

Nest.—Indistinguishable from that of the next species.

Range.—Central America and Mexico, north in February to valley of Lower
Rio Grande.


                           WHITE-WINGED DOVE
                319.     Melopelia asiatica.     12 in.

Large black patch on the ears; tail only moderately long, and broadly
rounded, with large white ends to the outer feathers. Besides the
regular cooing notes, common to doves, this species has a peculiar song
likened by some, to the first attempts at crowing, of a young rooster.

Nest.—A shabby platform of twigs, lined with bits of weeds, moss and
leaves; placed at any height from the ground in bushes, trees or cacti.
Eggs white.

Range.—Texas, New Mexico, Arizona and casually southern Florida,
southward.

[Illustration: ]


                              GROUND DOVE
         320.     Chæmepelia passerina terrestris.     6.75 in.

Size very small; tail short and nearly square. Back of head blue-gray;
forehead and most of underparts pinkish. Bill, feet and eye, more or
less red.

Nest.—A frail structure of twigs, lined with pine needles; placed
usually at low elevations in bushes. The two eggs are pure white.

Range.—South Atlantic and Gulf States; abundant near the coasts; winters
throughout its range.

320a., Mexican Ground Dove, found from Texas to California, is slightly
paler than the eastern species.


                               INCA DOVE
                  321.     Scardafella inca.     8 in.

Tail long, with the outer feathers tipped with white, and shorter than
the middle ones. Feathers mostly margined with brownish-black. The bases
of the primaries are bright chestnut, and the whole underwing is of that
color; bill black; eye and feet reddish.

Range.—Southern Texas, southern Arizona and southern New Mexico.

[Illustration: ]


                VULTURES, HAWKS AND OWLS—Order Raptores
                  AMERICAN VULTURES—Family Cathartidæ


                       TURKEY VULTURE OR BUZZARD
          325.     Cathartes aura septentrionalis.     30 in.

Head naked; red or carmine; bill dull whitish; eyes brown; feet pinkish.
Plumage blackish-brown.

Nest.—Their two eggs are laid upon the ground, between rocks, under
logs, or in hollow trees; they are whitish, handsomely blotched with
brown.

Range.—Breeds from the Gulf north to New Jersey, Illinois, Minnesota and
British Columbia.


                             BLACK VULTURE
                 326.     Catharista urubu.     24 in.

Entire plumage, including the naked head, black; feet and tip of bill
yellowish. Under surface of the wings white, making it very easy to
identify.

Nest.—Two eggs, greenish-white, blotched with brownish. (3.00 × 2.00).

Range.—Resident north to North Carolina, southern Illinois and Kansas.

[Illustration: ]


               FALCONS, HAWKS AND EAGLES—Family Falconidæ


                          SWALLOW-TAILED KITE
               327.     Elanoides forficatus.     24 in.

Tail long and deeply forked; plumage white, and glossy black; feet short
but stout; bill black, with cere and feet bluish-gray. The flight of
these birds is very swift and swallow-like; at times they circle about
for long periods, on motionless wings; at others, they will be seen
swooping over marshes and low ground; the evolutions they perform during
the mating season are wonderful to behold, floating, sailing, doubling
and turning, in all imaginable positions, as though they were a part of
the air itself.

Notes.—A shrill whistled “peet-peet.”

Nest.—Composed of twigs, lined with moss and rootlets; usually located
in the tops of trees at great heights; 90 to 125 feet from the ground
not being uncommon; eggs pale bluish-white, very handsomely marked with
brown (1.85 × 1.5).

Range.—Breeds north to Virginia, Manitoba and Minnesota; winters south
of the United States.

[Illustration: ]


                           WHITE-TAILED KITE
                  328.     Elanus leucurus.     16 in.

Head, underparts and tail, white; shoulders black; upperparts gray.
Young, with the back tinged with rusty. Their food consists largely of
snakes, but they also eat a great many small rodents and insects.

Nest.—Made of sticks, weeds and leaves, and placed in trees at quite an
elevation from the ground; eggs creamy white, profusely blotched with
brown.

Range.—Texas to central California, and less often east of the Miss.
River, north to South Carolina.


                            MISSISSIPPI KITE
             329.     Ictinia mississippiensis.     14 in.

Head, underparts and ends of secondaries, bluish-gray. Lores and tail
black; back dark; eyes red.

Nest.—Of sticks and weeds in the tops of tall trees; eggs bluish white,
usually unmarked, but occasionally with a few brownish specks (1.65 ×
1.25).

Range.—Breeds north to South Carolina, southern Illinois and Kansas;
winters south of the United States.

[Illustration: ]


                             EVERGLADE KITE
               330.     Rostrhamus sociabilis.     15 in.

Bill very slender and much hooked, the lower mandible being decurved
somewhat, to match the upper; the cutting edge of the bill without a
tooth or notch, as most hawks and kites have. Lores naked and yellowish,
like the cere; eyes red. Plumage blackish; rump and bases of outer tail
feathers, as well as tip white. This tropical species is found in the
United States, only in the southern half of Florida, in the densest
swamps, being fairly abundant in the Everglades. They are said to feed
exclusively upon a certain species of water snail, and each bird has a
particular perch to which he takes every snail he captures, and after
skillfully extracting the animal with its curiously modified beak, it
drops the shell on the mound beneath. (Bendire).

Nest.—Of twigs, lined with leaves and weeds, placed at low elevations in
bushes or underbrush, often over water; eggs pale greenish-white,
spotted with brown.

Range.—Southern Florida.

[Illustration: ]


                               MARSH HAWK
                 331.     Circus hudsonius.     19 in.

Upper tail coverts and base of tail white. Male, blue-gray above; below,
whitish, streaked and barred with rusty. Female and young.—Above rusty
brownish-black; below rusty with dusky streaks on the breast and sides.
As shown by its name, this hawk is found most abundantly in or around
marshes or wet meadows. I have found them especially abundant in boggy
marshes such as frequented by bitterns. Their flight is quiet and
owl-like, and as they do most of their feeding toward dusk, they often
seem like owls as they flit by without a sound. Their food is composed
chiefly of meadow mice and moles, which they spy and dash down upon as
they fly at low elevations.

Notes.—A shrill whistle when their nest is approached.

Nest.—Of grasses, on the ground in marshes; four plain bluish-white eggs
(1.80 × 1.40); May, June.

Range.—Breeds locally in the whole of the United States and Canada,
north to Hudson Bay; winters in the southern half of the United States.

[Illustration: ]


                           SHARP-SHINNED HAWK
                  332.     Accipiter velox.     12 in.

This little hawk, so near like the Cooper, is one of the most active of
the family, and from this fact it gets its name _velox_, meaning swift.
It is often seen in woods, orchard, or even about buildings in large
cities, in which latter places, it does good service in catching English
Sparrows. If they would confine their food to these birds, no one would
object, but unfortunately they will take any little bird that comes
within their reach, or that they are able to catch. They are one of the
very few hawks that do live largely upon birds, and even they destroy a
great many mice.

Notes.—A shrill, three-syllabled whistle.

Nest.—A rude and usually frail structure of twigs, placed in branches of
trees, usually at quite low elevations (15 ft.). Eggs white, beautifully
blotched with brown (1.45 × 1.15).

Range.—Breeds chiefly in northern U. S. and Canada; winters throughout
the United States.

[Illustration: ]


                              COOPER HAWK
                 333.     Accipiter cooperi.     16 in.

This hawk is a large edition of the last species. All hawks vary in
size, this one and the last, perhaps, more than any others. Female hawks
are always the largest. A large female of the Sharp-shinned variety, is
often as large as a small male Cooper, but the crown of the Cooper is
darker than that of the Sharp-shinned, and his tail is always rounded,
while that of the last species is nearly square at the end. This is also
a destructive species; it is usually one of these two hawks, or the
Goshawk, that is responsible for the ill-feeling with which farmers
regard all of the family. All small hawks are known to farmers as
“Chicken Hawks,” and large ones as “Hen Hawks,” but the majority of our
hawks rarely disturb fowls.

Nest.—Of sticks in crotches of trees, usually quite high up; often old
crows’ nests are used; eggs bluish-white, unmarked or very faintly
specked with brown. (1.90 × 1.45); April.

Range.—Breeds from the Gulf north to southern Canada; winters from Mass.
and Oregon southward.

[Illustration: ]


                            AMERICAN GOSHAWK
                334.     Astur atricapillus.     23 in.

Adults, above bluish-slate, darkest on the crown; a whitish line over
the eye; below white, finely waved with gray. Young, brownish-black,
with lighter edgings to the feathers; below whitish, streaked with
blackish-brown. Young birds can easily be distinguished from those of
any other species by their large size and the long tail. This handsome
species is one of the most rapacious and destructive of our birds of
prey. Their short wings and long tail enable them to glide among the
thickest foliage with great speed, and even the Ruffled Grouse cannot
escape them. In the north where they live in summer, they destroy great
numbers of Ptarmigan and Spruce Grouse, and come to us in the winter
with their appetite whetted for a diet of poultry and our game birds,
being exceedingly bold in their capture.

Nest.—Of sticks lined with weeds and bark, in tall trees; eggs white,
unmarked.

Range.—Breeds throughout Canada; winters in the northern half of the
United States.

[Illustration: ]


                              HARRIS HAWK
           335.     Parabuteo unicinctus harrisi.     20 in.

Tail coverts, base and tip of tail, white. Adults with the shoulders,
thighs and under wing-coverts, reddish-brown. Young with rusty edgings
to feathers on the back; below, rusty buff with blackish spots or
streaks; thighs barred with blackish. Space in front of eye, bare except
for stiff hair-like bristles, yellowish like the cere. This species is
the connecting link between the vultures and hawks of the genus _buteo_.
Its feedings habits are similar to those of the vultures, with which it
often associates when feeding upon carrion. They are very sluggish birds
and their flight is slow and heavy; when not feeding they are usually
perched on one foot on some dead limb, dozing.

Nest.—Made of sticks, twigs and weeds, placed in bushes or low trees.
Their three or four eggs are dull white, unmarked (2.10 × 1.65).

Range.—Mexico, north to southern United States chiefly in Texas, but
also found in New Mexico and casually east to Louisiana.

[Illustration: ]


                            RED-TAILED HAWK
                  337.     Buteo borealis.     21 in.

One of the handsomest and most powerfully built of our hawks. Adults
with the tail rusty-red, with or without a narrow blackish band near the
tip; below white, with a band of blackish streaks across the breast, and
dusky markings on the sides. Young birds are similar, but have the tail
grayish-brown with black bands. An examination of the food of this bird
of prey, made by the Department of Agriculture, shows that, instead of
living upon poultry as most farmers think, their food consists chiefly
of frogs, snakes, lizards, mice and insects, less than one in ten of the
stomachs examined containing any remains of poultry.

Notes.—A shrill whistle or scream.

Nest.—Of sticks, weeds, leaves and trash high up in tall trees; eggs
white, spotted with blackish-brown.

Range.—Breeds in United States and Southern Canada; winters in the
United States. 337a., Krider Hawk is a paler race found on the plains
from Minn. to Texas. 337d., Harlan Hawk, is darker and has the tail
mottled with blackish; found in the Gulf States.

[Illustration: ]


                          RED-SHOULDERED HAWK
                  339.     Buteo lineatus.     19 in.

Adults with the shoulders bright reddish-brown; primaries and
secondaries barred with black and white; below buffy thickly barred with
rusty-brown. Young with the shoulders duller; underparts white, streaked
all over with blackish-brown. This is one of the most abundant of the
birds of prey in Eastern United States, and it is also one of the most
useful, destroying quantities of moles and field mice, as well as
grasshoppers. Usually one or more pairs will be found in a piece of
woods. One pair that I know, and I presume it is the same pair, each
year has its nest on the edge of a colony of Black-crowned Night Herons
and, during the season, they live and feed their young largely upon the
young of these birds.

Nest.—Of sticks, lined with weeds and strips of bark; eggs white,
blotched with brown (2.15 × 1.75). April, May.

Range.—Breeds from the Gulf to Maine and Minnesota. 339a. Fla.
Red-Shouldered Hawk, found in Florida and north to So. Car., is paler
colored.

[Illustration: ]


                       SENNETT WHITE-TAILED HAWK
            341.     Buteo albicaudatus sennetti.     22 in.

Adults grayish-slate above and to the sides of the throat; tail and
underparts white, the former with a subterminal band of black and
indistinct wavy lines and the latter with fine barring on the sides. The
shoulders are largely chestnut. Young birds are brownish-black above and
usually white below, but the underparts are variable—often streaked with
rusty and blackish, or even wholly black.

They are useful hawks, their food consisting chiefly of insects and
moles or mice.

Nest.—Built in bushes in open land, rarely more than six feet above
ground. Composed of sticks, dry weeds and grasses making a bulky
structure visible for a long distance. Three eggs are not uncommon but
two is the usual number; they are dirty white with very few marks of
brown (2.35 × 1.85). Their nesting season ranges from as early as
February to July.

Range.—Not uncommon on the Gulf coast of Texas and in the lower Rio
Grande Valley, southwards into South America.

[Illustration: ]


                             SWAINSON HAWK
                  342.     Buteo swainsoni.     20 in.

This species has the greatest variety of plumages of any of our hawks.
It has only three outer primaries notched near the tips, while the two
last species, which are the only ones that can be confused with it, have
four. Adults in the light phase have a band of rich chestnut across the
breast. Adults in the dark phase are uniform blackish-brown, with some
rusty edgings and with thighs more or less rusty. Young birds are buffy
below, with elongated blackish spots. Its harmless character can be
understood from the fact that it is no unusual sight to find other
birds, such as Arkansas Kingbird and Bullock Oriole, nesting in the same
tree; and the first mentioned species goes even further than this,
sometimes constructing its home in the sides of the nests of the hawks.

Nest.—Of sticks and twigs, either in trees or on the ground on rocky
ledges; eggs white, spotted with brown (2.20 × 1.70).

Range.—Western N. A., breeding from Texas to the Arctic regions; east to
Illinois and west to the Pacific.

[Illustration: ]


                           BROAD-WINGED HAWK
                 343.     Buteo platypterus.     16 in.

Adults grayish-brown above; below, streaked on the throat and breast,
and barred below, with rusty-brown; tail with three blackish bars. Young
similar above; below white, streaked with blackish-brown. They are most
apt to be confused with the Cooper and Red-Shouldered Hawk, but when in
flight, it can usually be distinguished at a distance, from the former
by its shorter tail, and from the latter by its smaller size and rounded
wings. They may be classed as abundant east of the Great Plains. They
are rather solitary in their habits, especially during the breeding
season, when but one pair is usually found in a piece of woods.

Notes.—A long, squeaking wail, sounding much like two branches rubbing
together and creaking.

Nest.—Of sticks, invariably lined with pieces of bark; usually placed in
crotches next to the trunks of large trees, but not usually at a great
height; eggs whitish, more or less blotched with brown and gray.

Range.—Breeds north to New Brunswick and Manitoba; winters in southern
half of the United States.

[Illustration: ]


                       AMERICAN ROUGH-LEGGED HAWK
        347a.     Archibuteo lagopus sancti-johannis.     22 in.

Legs feathered to the toes. Adults blackish on the back and belly; head
and breast, more or less grayish-white, streaked with dusky; tail white,
barred on the end with black; eyes brown. In the dark phase they are
blackish-brown, more or less mixed with rusty. This large, heavily-built
species is found in the United States, only in winter; it frequents
thinly wooded districts or meadows, where it catches its prey, which
consists of small rodents, insects and reptiles. It is very irregular in
its appearance, especially in the east, but it is most often found near
the coast. It is a sluggish species and I doubt if it does any harm to
wild birds or to poultry; it certainly does a great deal of good.

Nest.—Of sticks, on rocky ledges; eggs bluish-white, boldly splashed
with brown (1.90 × 1.55).

Range.—Breeds north of the United States border; winters in northern
United States.

[Illustration: ]


                     FERRUGINOUS ROUGH-LEGGED HAWK
              348.     Archibuteo ferrugineus.     23 in.

Legs feathered to the toes. Adults with back, shoulders, thighs and
legs, rusty, barred or streaked with black; tail grayish-white, tinged
with rusty. Young birds are brownish-black, above and without any rusty
below. In the dark phase they are sooty-brown, more or less varied with
rusty, and the tail is the same as in the light plumage. Their bill is
larger and tail longer than that of the last species. A fairly abundant
hawk on the plains and prairies west of the Miss., usually not at a
great distance from water.

Nest.—Usually on the ground on bluffs or rocky ledges, but sometimes in
trees; made of sticks and weeds; sometimes used year after year, and
then becoming bulky, as it is added to each year; eggs white, handsomely
spotted and blotched with blackish-brown, very variable.

Range.—Breeds west of the Miss., from Kansas, locally, and the Dakotas,
abundantly, north to Saskatchewan. Winters south to Mexico.

[Illustration: ]


                              GOLDEN EAGLE
                  349.     Aquila chryœtos.     35 in.

Legs feathered to the toes. Plumage blackish-brown, adults having the
lengthened feathers on the nape, golden-brown, and the tail more or less
mixed with white; leg feathers rusty. These large, handsome, well-built
birds of prey are fairly abundant in thinly settled country west of the
Miss., especially in mountains and foot-hills. They are very powerful
birds and a single pair of them will rule the whole country in which
they reside. They are very shy in the presence of man and will never
attack a person or show fight unless wounded or surprised at their
meals. Their food consist of prairie dogs, rodents, ducks and even
fawns.

Notes.—A shrill a “kee-kee-kee.”

Nest.—A very bulky structure of large sticks, lined with twigs, needles
and in some cases evergreen; eggs creamy-white, spotted, splashed and
clouded with various shades of brown and gray (2.90 × 2.50).

Range.—West of the Miss., from Mexico northward; rarely eastward to the
Atlantic coast.

[Illustration: ]


                               BALD EAGLE
              352.     Haliœetus leucocephalus.     34 in.

Legs not feathered to the toes. Adults with white head and tail. Young
birds similar in color to those of the Golden Eagle, but blacker and
with the legs always bare on the lower half. Young, with brown eyes,
like those of the last; adults with yellow eyes and feet. This handsome
bird of prey, our national emblem, is resident and locally distributed
throughout the United States and Canada, always near streams or lakes,
and most abundant on the seacoasts. Their food, like that of the Golden
Eagle, is chiefly caught by themselves, and consists of any small
mammals, geese, ducks, etc., and during the summer, or when their usual
food is scarce, they feed upon fish, which they either catch for
themselves or taken by force from Ospreys.

Nest.—Of sticks large and bulky, and usually in tops of very tall trees;
two eggs, pure white (2.75 × 2.10).

Range.—Resident locally in whole of North America.

[Illustration: ]


                            WHITE GRYFALCON
                  353.     Falco islandus.     23 in.

Adults in perfect plumage, pure white, slightly barred on the back and
spotted below with black.

Nest.—Of sticks, lined with grasses and feathers; placed on ledges of
cliffs; eggs bulky white, specked with reddish brown, often so thickly
that the ground color is obscured (2.30 × 1.80).

Range.—Arctic region, breeding in Northern Greenland, and wintering to
the Gulf of St. Lawrence, and casually to northern Maine.


                             GRAY GYRFALCON
                 354.     Falco rusticolus.     23 in.

Adults white, heavily barred above, and streaked below with gray and
black.

Range.—Arctic regions, south in winter, rarely to northern United
States.

354a. GYRFALCON (F. r. gyrfalco). Similar to the last but darker, the
latter being usually more white than dusky, while this is the reverse.

354b. BLACK GYRFALCON (F. r. obsoletus). Much darker than the last, the
markings tending to be buffy white spots on a grayish black ground.

[Illustration: ]


                             PRAIRIE FALCON
                  355.     Falco mexicanus.     18 in.

A blackish patch on the sides of the throat, similar to that of the Duck
Hawk. Above brownish black, much paler and never with the slaty color of
the Duck Hawk; below streaked or spotted with blackish brown. These
falcons are fairly abundant on the western plains and prairies, and are
also found in wooded mountain regions. They are strong and active and
will fight fiercely if captured. They live upon small mammals, birds and
occasionally, grouse. Their flight is very swift and accomplished by
rapid wing beats, with occasional sailings.

Notes.—A cackle, and rapidly repeated “kee-kee-kee.” (Bendire).

Nest.—A mass of sticks and trash, on bluffs or rocky ledges, and
sometimes in trees; eggs reddish buff, thickly sprinkled and blotched
with brown (2.50 × 1.60).

Range.—Eastern border of the Great Plains to the Pacific; and from
Saskatchewan to southern Mexico.

[Illustration: ]


                               DUCK HAWK
             356a.     Falco peregrinus anatum.     17 in.

Black moustache mark, or patch on each side of the throat. Adults white
below, tinged with buffy on the breast and sides, and lightly barred
with black; above bluish slate, darkest on the crown. Some adults are
darker, and much more heavily barred than others. Young, brownish black
with rusty edges to the feathers; below, buffy, heavily streaked with
blackish. This is one of the handsomest and most dashing of the
raptores, and is very similar to the one formerly most used for the
chase in England. They are swift and fearless in pursuit of their prey,
and the fastest flying ducks as well as the slower herons fall easy
victims to their valor. Their feet are exceptionally large, and they are
often, on this account, known as Great-footed Hawks.

Nest.—Eggs laid upon bare ledges or soil, with very little, if any,
nest. Bright buff, marked with rich rusty brown (2.05 × 1.55).

Range.—Breeds in Northern United States and Canada, most abundant west
of the Miss.

[Illustration: ]


                              PIGEON HAWK
                 357.     Falco columbarius.     12 in.

Adult male, bluish slate above, with black shaft lines to the feathers;
below buffy on the breast, sides and thighs; streaked on the breast and
barred on the flanks with black; tail with four black bands. Female and
young, blackish brown above; below streaked with dusky. These little
falcons are very bold and courageous when led by the pangs of hunger,
chasing their prey close to human beings, and they have been known to
follow birds, which, in their fright, have dashed through windows in
houses. They live upon any of the smaller birds, as well as rodents,
grasshoppers and other insects.

Nest.—Usually a slight platform of twigs in trees, deep in the woods,
less often in cavities in trees, and sometimes on ledges; eggs buffy,
heavily blotched with chestnut (1.50 × 1.20).

Range.—Breeds chiefly north of the United States, but occasionally on
the northern border; winters in northern United States.

[Illustration: ]


                           RICHARDSON MERLIN
          357b.     Falco columbarius richardsonii.     12 in.

Both adults and young are similar to the same of the last species, but
they are much paler colored, and the tail is crossed by six light bars.
The habits of this species, which seems to have quite a limited range,
are precisely like those of the Pigeon Hawk. Like that species, it flies
swiftly, with rapidly beating wings, and occasionally sails and soars.
The under surface of the wings is prominently barred, but not as much so
as that of the Pigeon Hawk; it is very conspicuous when in flight.

Nest.—Either in hollow trees, or a rude platform of sticks, usually not
very high from the ground; eggs buffy white, handsomely blotched with
brown (1.60 × 1.25).

Range.—From the Miss. to the Rockies, and from Mexico north to
Saskatchewan, locally distributed.

[Illustration: ]


                              SPARROW HAWK
                360.     Falco sparverius.     10.5 in.

This is the smallest and one of the handsomest of our hawks. Cannot be
mistaken for any other species, because of its bright colors and odd
marking. The female is barred on the back, wings and tail, while the
male has but a few short bars on the back. The general tone of both,
above, is a bright rusty-brown. This is the most abundant hawk that we
have, and it is also best known, chiefly because it is found commonly in
the vicinity of farmhouses and commonly on the outskirts of cities.
Their flight is peculiar, a few rapid wing beats, then a short sail,
alternately. They are very noisy in mating season and when the young
birds first fly, their notes being a rapidly repeated,
“killy-killy-killy.” Their food is of grasshoppers, mice and rarely
small birds.

Nest.—Usually in cavities in trees, often in deserted Flicker holes, the
eggs being laid upon the bare wood. They are cream colored, finely
sprinkled and spotted with brown (1.35 × 1.10).

Range.—Breeds from the Gulf States to Labrador and Hudson Bay. Winters
in southern United States.

[Illustration: ]


                            AUDUBON CARACARA
                362.     Polyborus cheriway.     22 in.

These peculiar birds cannot be mistaken for any of our hawks or falcons.
They are very sluggish birds, with habits resembling both those of
buzzards and some of the hawks. They are usually known in localities
where they are found, as Caracara Eagles. As we might suspect from the
shape of their bill, the naked and bristle-covered lores, and the feet,
which have not the strongly hooked talons of hawks, the food of these
birds is largely carrion. It is terrestrial in its habits and is most
often seen, when not in flight, either upon the ground, or standing
erect on branches at low elevations. They are more quarrelsome in their
disposition than are vultures, and frequently fight over their prey.

Nest.—A bulky, but shabby pile of sticks and weeds, in bushes or low
trees; eggs buff, sprinkled, spotted or blotched with yellowish brown or
chestnut (2.50 × 1.80).

Range.—Resident of the Mexican border of the U. S. and in southern
Florida.

[Illustration: ]


                       AMERICAN OSPREY; FISH HAWK
           364.     Pandion haliætus carolinensis.     23 in.

Real old birds have the head whiter, and less white edging to the back
feathers, than do the young. Feet very strong, and very hard and rough,
perfectly adapted to grasping slippery fish; outer toe can be used
equally as well, either in front or behind, when perching or grasping
their prey. Their food is entirely of fish, which they catch themselves,
by plunging after it, hovering in the air a few seconds while watching
the fish, preparatory to diving upon it. They are always found about
water and are very numerous on the seacoasts, where twenty or more may
frequently be seen at a time. They are protected by law in some states,
and by public sentiment in most others.

Notes.—A loud, tremulous, piercing whistle.

Nest.—Usually in trees; large and bulky, of sticks; sometimes on the
ground, telegraph poles, chimneys, etc. Eggs creamy buff, blotched with
rich brown (2.40 × 1.80).

Range.—Breeds from the Gulf to Labrador and Alaska; winters in the
southern half of the U. S.

[Illustration: ]


                            FAMILY ALUCONIDÆ


                                BARN OWL
                 365.     Aluco pratincola.     18 in.

Plumage very soft, finely barred and specked; general coloration gray,
yellowish-brown and white. No ear tufts; eyes small and brown; face very
long; legs very long. These peculiar owls are abundant in the south,
where they are commonly known as “Monkey-faced Owls,” because of their
odd visage. They are very useful birds, and are usually recognized as
such. Their food consists almost wholly of small squirrels, rodents,
reptiles and insects. It does most of its hunting just after dusk and
early in the morning. Its flight is rather slow and entirely noiseless,
as is that of all the members of the family.

Nest.—In hollow trees, under the roofs of barns or in caves; the four to
six eggs are pure white (l.70 × 1.30).

Range.—United States, breeding north to New York, Ontario, and
Washington. Winters in the southern half of the United States.

[Illustration: ]


                      HORNED OWLS—Family Bubonidæ


                        AMERICAN LONG-EARED OWL
                 366.     Asio wilsonianus.     15 in.

This species can readily be distinguished from the next, which is the
only one of the same size, by its long ear tufts; it is also darker, and
the markings on the breast are largely in the form of bars. In the
northern portions of the United States, this species is probably the
most abundant of owls, excepting the little Screech Owl. It is often
quite common, where its presence is little suspected, because, unless
disturbed, it flies only at night and is a rather silent species. During
the daytime it is usually sitting upright in the dense tops of evergreen
trees. Crows often discover them, and proclaim their hiding place to the
whole neighborhood by their incessant cawing. Owls of all kinds are in
disfavor with crows.

Notes.—A soft-toned “wo-hunk, wo-hunk.” (Bendire.)

Nest.—They lay from four to seven pure white eggs, usually in old crow
nests.

Range.—Resident from the Gulf to Nova Scotia and Manitoba.

[Illustration: ]


                            SHORT-EARED OWL
                  367.     Asio flammeus.     15.5 in.

Ear tufts very short; general color buffy, not nearly as brown nor as
dark as the last species usually is. They are not nearly as nocturnal as
most of the owls, and most of their hunting is done about dusk, when
they may be seen flying close to the ground over marshes or low land.
Their flight is perfectly silent, which aids them in securing their prey
of field mice, which they usually get without stopping in their flight,
just swooping down, extending their long legs, armed with wicked little
claws, and it is all over with the little rodent, he being carried to a
nearby stump, and devoured, fur, bones and all.

Notes.—A very short, shrill cry, evidently their call note, and a low
clucking uttered as they swoop over your head; besides the usual
snapping of the bill.

Nest.—On the ground, usually in marshes; the four to seven eggs are pure
white, (1.55 × 1.25).

Range.—Breeds locally from the Gulf to the Arctic regions; winters
throughout the United States.

[Illustration: ]


                               BARRED OWL
                    368.     Strix varia.     20 in.

Eyes dark brown. This is the most abundant of the large owls throughout
its range. It has no ears. This species is the common “hoot owl,” that
is the terror of small children and many older ones. They are noisy
birds, and two of them like to get at opposite sides of a piece of woods
and talk to each other. Their notes are very variable but are oftenest
combinations of “who-whos” and “too-toos,” often ending in a mournful
wail. They spend the day in slumber, unless routed out of the dense
trees where they rest, by crows or human beings. They are one of the
least harmful of the family and should be protected.

Nest.—Usually in hollow trees, but sometimes in old crow nests. Eggs
pure white (1.95 × 1.65).

Range.—Resident in eastern North America. 368a. Florida Barred Owl
(alleni), is smaller, darker and the toes are unfeathered, as are those
of 368b, Texas Barred Owl, found in southern Texas.

[Illustration: ]


                             GREAT GRAY OWL
                370.     Scotiaptex nebulosa.     27 in.

Tail long; eyes small and yellow. This large owl is only found in
Northern United States during the winter. Its tail is unusually long, as
are all its feathers, thereby making it appear a very much larger bird
than it really is; it weighs but little more than the Barred Owl. They
do not appear to be in especial abundance anywhere, but occasionally
large flights of them will occur in some parts of the country; they seem
to occur most freely in Minnesota and North Dakota. They are nocturnal
like the majority of the family, and subsist largely upon mice and
hares.

Nest.—Of sticks, in trees, usually pines, in heavily wooded districts;
eggs white (2.15 × 1.70).

Range.—Breeds from southern Labrador, Hudson Bay and Alaska northward;
winters south to the northern border of the United States and casually
to Long Island and Illinois.

[Illustration: ]


                             RICHARDSON OWL
          371.     Cryptoglaux funerea richardsoni.     10 in.

This species bears considerable resemblance to the little Acadian Owls,
but is grayer; the top of the head has numerous round white spots and
the wing coverts are spotted with white.

Nest.—Usually in holes of trees; eggs white.

Range.—Breeds throughout Canada, and possibly in the northern parts of
the northern states; winters south to northern United States.


                       SAW-WHET OWL; ACADIAN OWL.
                372.     Cryptoglaux acadica.     8 in.

Smallest of our eastern Owls; no ear tufts. General color brownish above
and white below with the sides streaked with brown. No markings on wing
coverts, but scapulars spotted with white. It is chiefly nocturnal in
its habits and, consequently, is not often seen even if they are
abundant.

Range.—Breeds from northern U. S. northward; winters in northern United
States.

[Illustration: ]


                              SCREECH OWL
                    373.     Otus asio.     9.5 in.

Two color phases independent of age, sex or season; eyes yellow; has ear
tufts. The Screech Owl, or its sub-species, is found throughout the
United States, and is one of the most abundant and best known of the
family. They are not at all timid, in winter frequently being found in
church towers, while on the outskirts of cities and in the country, they
reside, at all seasons of the year, in orchards. They remain mated for
life, and live in the same tree for years, if not too much disturbed by
curious boys. Both adults and the four young are often found in the nest
together, and they offer no resistance when they are removed by hand.
Their food is almost wholly of insects and rodents.

Notes.—A wavering trill.

Nest.—In holes of trees; eggs white (1.35 × 1.20).

Range.—Resident in U. S. and southern Canada. 373a. Florida Screech Owl
(floridanus), is smaller and slightly darker, 373b. Texas Screech Owl
(mccalli), is smaller and more heavily barred on the sides.

[Illustration: ]


                            GREAT HORNED OWL
                 375.     Bubo virginianus.     23 in.

Has ear tufts, thus distinguishing it from any other of our large,
powerfully built owls. These large birds are the fiercest, most active
and most destructive of the family. Their size and strength allows them
to kill skunks and woodchucks, as well as poultry, grouse and small
mammals and birds. They seem to be especially fond of skunks, and nearly
all of them that I have seen or handled, have given unmistakable
evidence of their recent and close association with these animals.

Notes.—A deep, dismal “who-who,” and a loud unearthly shriek.

Nest.—Usually in deserted hawk or crow nests, and also in hollow trees;
eggs white (2.25 × 1.85). Feb., March.

Range.—Breeds and resident from the Gulf to Labrador. 375a. Western
Horned Owl (pallescens) is paler colored; found in the plains and
Rockies north to Manitoba. 375b. Arctic Horned Owl (subarcticus), is
chiefly black and white; found in Arctic America, wintering south to
northern border of United States.

[Illustration: ]


                               SNOWY OWL
                   376.     Nyctea nyctea.     25 in.

No ear tufts. Plumage white, more or less heavily spotted with black,
the female usually being quite strongly barred on the back. They are
locally abundant in the far north, preferring low, mossy lands to the
more timbered districts. Here they find an abundance of food during the
summer months, living upon hares, lemmings, ptarmigan and ducks. They
are about the equal of the Horned Owl in strength, and usually will
weigh a few ounces more; they will frequently kill animals or birds as
heavy, or heavier, than themselves. They also catch a great many fish;
these they get in shallow water among the rock-weed covered stones, by
reaching down quickly and seizing their prey in their strong claws.

Nest.—On the ground in dry portions of marshes; the 2 to 8 eggs are pure
white.

Range.—Breeds from Labrador and Hudson Bay, northward, and possibly
farther south; winters casually to the Middle States, and commonly to
Minnesota and Maine.

[Illustration: ]


                           AMERICAN HAWK OWL
              377a.     Surnia ulula caparoch.     15 in.

Tail long and rounded; plumage mottled black, white and gray, with
little, if any, brownish tinge; heavily barred with black. These owls,
curiously resembling a hawk in build, and more so in flight, are very
active and hunt more during the daytime than after dark. They feed
largely upon small rodents and lemmings which are very abundant in their
summer home, and also kill a great many small birds. They seem to be
impartial to wooded districts, or open marshes and low lands, where they
may be seen skimming about close to the ground.

Nest.—Either of sticks in the tops of trees, or in hollow cavities. The
eggs are white, as are those of all owls, and nearly globular in shape
(1.40 × 1.25).

Range.—Breeds from Newfoundland and Manitoba northward, and possibly
farther south on the mountains. Winters south to northern United States,
rarely to New York and Illinois.

[Illustration: ]


                             BURROWING OWL
           378.     Speotyto cunicularia hypogœa.     10 in.

Legs very long, and nearly bare on the lower part of tarsi; tail short;
no ear tufts. An abundant and useful species in the prairie regions west
of the Mississippi. They live in the same region that prairie dogs are
found, using deserted burrows of these animals, or taking them by force,
for they are more than a match for these curious animals; they do not,
as has often been said, live peaceably in the same burrows with them. On
the contrary, young prairie dogs, as well as rodents, small snakes and
birds, form a large part of their daily diet. They are both diurnal and
nocturnal, doing most of their hunting after dusk, but often seen
sitting at the mouth of the burrow during the daytime. The six to ten
eggs that they deposit at the end of these burrows are white.

Range.—West of the Miss. Valley, north to Southern Manitoba and British
Columbia. 378a. Florida Burrowing Owl (floridana), is smaller and
whiter; found in southern Florida.




                                 INDEX.


                                   A
  Anhinga, 68
  Auk, Great, 30
      Razor-billed, 29
  Avocet, American, 144


                                   B
  Bittern, American, 118
      Cory Least, 119
      Least, 119
  Bob-white, 177
      Florida, 177
      Texan, 177
  Booby, 66
      Blue-faced, 65
  Brant, 108


                                   C
  Caracara, Audubon, 220
  Chachalaca, 191
  Coot, American, 140
  Cormorant, 69
      Double-crested, 70
      Florida, 70
      Mexican, 71
  Crane, Little Brown, 131
      Sandhill, 131
      Whooping, 130
  Curlew, Eskimo, 166
      Hudsonian, 165
      Long-billed, 164


                                   D
  Dovekie, 31
  Dove, Ground, 195
      Inca, 195
      Mourning, 193
      White-fronted, 194
      White-winged, 194
  Dowitcher, 148
      Long-billed, 148
  Duck, Am. Golden-eye, 94
      Am. Scaup, 92
      Baldpate, 83
      Barrow Golden-eye, 94
      Black, 79
      Black-bellied Tree, 109
      Buffle-head, 95
      Canvas-back, 91
      Eider, American, 99
          Northern, 99
          King, 100
      Florida, 80
      Fulvous Tree, 110
      Gadwall, 81
      Harlequin, 97
      Lesser Scaup, 92
      Long-tailed, 96
      Labrador, 98
      Mallard, 78
      Mottled, 80
      Old Squaw, 96
      Pintail, 88
      Redhead, 90
      Ring-necked, 93
      Ruddy, 103
      Scoter, Am., 101
          Surf, 102
          White-winged, 101
      Shoveller, 87
      Teal, Blue-winged, 85
          Cinnamon, 86
          Green-winged, 84
      Widgeon, 82
      Wood, 89


                                   E
  Eagle, Bald, 213
      Golden, 212
  Egret, American, 122
      Reddish, 124
  Eider, American, 99
      Northern, 99
      King, 100


                                   F
  Falcon, Prairie, 215
  Flamingo, American, 112
  Frigate Bird, 74
  Fulmar, 58


                                   G
  Gallinule, Florida, 139
      Purple, 138
  Gannet, 67
  Godwit, Hudsonian, 157
      Marbled, 156
  Goose, Am. White-fronted, 106
      Cackling, 107
      Canada, 107
      Blue, 105
      Snow, Greater, 104
      Snow, Lesser, 104
  Goshawk, American, 203
  Grebe, Eared, 20
      Horned, 19
      Holbœll, 18
      Least, 21
      Pied-billed, 22
      Western, 17
  Grouse, Canada, 182
      Dusky, 181
      Richardson, 181
      Ruffed, 183
      Sage, 188
      Sharp-tailed, 187
      Sharp-tailed Prairie, 187
      Spruce, 182
  Guillemot, Black, 27
      Mandt, 27
  Gull, Black-backed, 39
      Bonaparte, 44
      Franklin, 43
      Glaucous, 37
      Herring, 40
      Iceland, 38
      Ivory, 35
      Kittiwake, 36
      Kumlien, 38
      Laughing, 42
      Ring-billed, 41
      Ross, 45
      Sabine, 46
  Gyrfalcon, 214
      White, 214


                                   H
  Hawk, Am. Rough-legged, 210
      Am. Sparrow, 219
      Broad-winged, 209
      Cooper, 202
      Duck, 216
      Ferruginous Rough-leg, 211
      Harlan, 205
      Harris, 204
      Krider, 205
      Marsh, 200
      Pigeon, 217
      Red-shouldered, 206
      Red-tailed, 205
      Sennett White-tailed, 207
      Sharp-shinned, 201
      Swainson, 208
  Heath Hen, 186
  Heron, Great White, 120
      Great Blue, 121
      Green, 127
      Little Blue, 126
      Louisiana, 125
      Night, Black-crowned, 128
      Night, Yellow-crowned, 129
      Snowy, 123


                                   I
  Ibis, Glossy, 116
      Scarlet, 115
      White, 114
      White-faced Glossy, 116
      Wood, 117


                                   J
  Jacana, Mexican, 176
  Jaeger, Long-tailed, 34
      Parasitic, 34
      Pomarine, 33


                                   K
  Killdeer, 179
  Kite, Everglade, 199
      Mississippi, 198
      Swallow-tailed, 197
      White-tailed, 198
  Kittiwake, 36
  Knot, 150


                                   L
  Limpkin, 132
  Loon, 23
      Black-throated, 24
      Red-throated, 25


                                   M
  Mallard, 78
  Man-o-War Bird, 74
  Merganser, American, 75
      Red-breasted, 76
      Hooded, 77
  Merlin, Richardson, 218
  Murre, 28
      Brunnich, 28


                                   N
  Noddy, 56


                                   O
  Osprey, American, 221
  Owl, Am. Hawk, 231
      Arctic Horned, 229
      Barn, 222
      Barred, 225
      Barred, Florida, 225
      Burrowing, 232
      Burrowing, Florida, 232
      Great Gray, 226
      Great Horned, 229
      Long-eared, 223
      Richardson, 227
      Saw-whet, 227
      Screech, 228
      Short-eared, 224
      Western Horned, 229
      Snowy, 230
  Oyster-catcher, 175


                                   P
  Partridge, Gambel, 179
      Messena, 180
      Mearns, 180
      Scaled, 178
  Pelican, Am. White, 72
      Brown, 73
  Petrel, Leach, 63
      Stormy, 62
      Wilson, 62
  Phalarope, Northern, 142
      Red, 141
      Wilson, 143
  Pheasant, Ring-necked, 190
  Pigeon, Passenger, 192
  Plover, Am. Golden, 168
      Black-Bellied, 167
      Killdeer, 169
      Mountain, 173
      Piping, 171
      Piping, Belted, 171
      Semipalmated, 170
      Snowy, 172
      Upland, 161
      Wilson, 172
  Prairie Hen, 185
      Lesser, 186
  Ptarmigan, Allen, 184
      Rock, 184
      Willow, 184
      Welch, 184
  Puffin, 26
      Large-billed, 26


                                   Q
  Quail, 188


                                   R
  Rail, Black, 137
      Carolina, 136
      Clapper, 134
          Louisiana, 134
          Florida, 134
          Wayne, 134
      King, 133
      Sora, 136
      Virginia, 135
      Yellow, 137


                                   S
  Sanderling, 155
  Sandpiper, Baird, 152
      Bartramian, 161
      Buff-breasted, 162
      Least, 153
      Pectoral, 151
      Purple, 151
      Red-backed, 154
      Semipalmated, 153
      Solitary, 159
  Sandpiper, Spotted, 136
      Stilt, 149
      Western, 153
      White-rumped, 152
  Scoter, American, 101
      Surf, 102
      White-winged, 101
  Shoveller, 87
  Snake-bird, 68
  Snipe, Wilson, 147
  Shearwater, Audubon, 59
      Cory, 59
      Greater, 60
      Sooty, 61
  Skimmer, Black, 57
  Skua, 32
  Spoonbill, Roseate, 113
  Stilt, Black-necked, 145
  Swan, Trumpeter, 111
      Whistling, 111


                                   T
  Teal, Blue-winged, 85
      Cinnamon, 86
      Green-winged, 84
  Tern, Arctic, 51
      Black, 55
      Bridled, 54
      Cabot, 49
      Caspian, 48
      Common, 51
      Forster, 50
      Gull-billed, 47
      Least, 53
      Noddy, 56
      Roseate, 52
      Royal, 48
      Sooty, 54
  Tropic Bird, Yellow-billed, 64
  Turkey, Wild, 189
  Turnstone, 174
      Ruddy, 174


                                   V
  Vulture, Black, 196
      Turkey, 196


                                   W
  Willet, 160
      Western, 160
  Woodcock, American, 146


                                   Y
  Yellow-legs, 158
      Greater, 158




                           Transcriber’s Notes


--Retained publisher information from the printed copy (the electronic
  edition is in the public domain in the country of publication).

--Corrected some obvious typographical errors, and standardized spelling
  of some bird names, e.g., "Redwing Blackbird" vs. "Red-winged
  Black-bird".

--Included *** as the A.O.U. number for non-native game birds.

--In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Bird Guide, by Chester A. Reed

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BIRD GUIDE ***

***** This file should be named 46516-0.txt or 46516-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/6/5/1/46516/

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, Chris Curnow and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
