The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Rosetta Stone, by E. A. Wallis Budge

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Rosetta Stone

Author: E. A. Wallis Budge

Release Date: April 6, 2015 [EBook #48649]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ROSETTA STONE ***




Produced by Elizabeth Oscanyan and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)






                                  THE
                             ROSETTA STONE


       _PRINTED BY ORDER OF THE TRUSTEES OF THE BRITISH MUSEUM._


                                LONDON:
                      SOLD AT THE BRITISH MUSEUM.


                                 1913.


                           _Price Sixpence._

                         [ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                LONDON:
                           HARRISON AND SONS,
                  PRINTERS IN ORDINARY TO HIS MAJESTY.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: Frontispiece]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                           THE ROSETTA STONE.


                      THE DISCOVERY OF THE STONE.

The famous slab of black basalt which stands at the southern end of the
Egyptian Gallery in the British Museum, and which has for more than a
century been universally known as the “Rosetta Stone,” was found at a
spot near the mouth of the great arm of the Nile that flows through the
Western Delta to the sea, not far from the town of “Rashîd,” or as
Europeans call it, “Rosetta.” According to one account it was found
lying on the ground, and according to another it was built into a very
old wall, which a company of French soldiers had been ordered to remove
in order to make way for the foundations of an addition to the fort,
afterwards known as “Fort St. Julien.”[1] The actual finder of the
Stone was a French Officer of Engineers, whose name is sometimes spelt
Boussard, and sometimes Bouchard, who subsequently rose to the rank of
General, and was alive in 1814. He made his great discovery in August,
1799. Finding that there were on one side of the Stone lines of strange
characters, which it was thought might be writing, as well as long
lines of Greek letters, Boussard reported his discovery to General
Menou, who ordered him to bring the Stone to his house in Alexandria.
This was immediately done, and the Stone was, for about two years,
regarded as the General’s private property. When Napoleon heard of the
Stone, he ordered it to be taken to Cairo and placed in the “Institut
National,” which he had recently founded in that city. On its arrival
in Cairo it became at once an object of the deepest interest to the
body of learned men whom Napoleon had taken with him on his expedition
to Egypt, and the Emperor himself exhibited the greatest curiosity in
respect of the contents of the inscriptions cut upon it. He at once
ordered a number of copies of the Stone to be made for distribution
among the scholars of Europe, and two skilled lithographers, “citizens
Marcel and Galland,” were specially brought to Cairo from Paris to make
them. The plan which they followed was to cover the surface of the
Stone with printer’s ink, and then to lay upon it a sheet of paper
which they rolled with india-rubber rollers until a good impression had
been taken. Several of these ink impressions were sent to scholars of
great repute in many parts of Europe, and in the autumn of 1801 General
Dagua took two to Paris, where he committed them to the care of
“citizen Du Theil” of the Institut National of Paris.

Footnote 1:

  This fort is marked on Napoleon’s Map of Egypt, and it stood on the
  left or west bank of the Rosetta arm of the Nile.


                  THE ARRIVAL OF THE STONE IN ENGLAND.

After the successful operations of Sir Ralph Abercromby in Egypt in the
spring of 1801, a Treaty of Capitulation was drawn up, and by Article
XVI the Rosetta Stone and several other large and important Egyptian
antiquities were surrendered to General Hutchinson at the end of August
in that year. Some of these he despatched at once to England in H.M.S.
“Admiral,” and others in H.M.S. “Madras,” but the Rosetta Stone did not
leave Egypt until later in the year. After the ink impressions had been
taken from it, the Stone was transferred from Cairo to General Menou’s
house in Alexandria, where it was kept covered with cloth and under a
double matting. In September, 1801, Major-General Turner claimed the
Stone by virtue of the Treaty mentioned above, but as it was generally
regarded as the French General’s private property, the surrender of it
was accompanied by some difficulty. In the following month
Major-General Turner obtained possession of the Stone, and embarked
with it on H.M.S. “L’Égyptienne,” and arrived at Portsmouth in
February, 1802. On March 11 it was deposited at the rooms of the
Society of Antiquaries of London, where it remained for a few months,
and the writings upon it were submitted to a very careful examination
by many Oriental and Greek scholars. In July the President of the
Society caused four plaster casts of the Stone to be made for the
Universities of Oxford, Cambridge, Edinburgh and Dublin, and had good
copies of the Greek text engraved, and despatched to all the great
Universities, Libraries, Academies and Societies in Europe. Towards the
close of the year the Stone was removed from the Rooms of the Society
of Antiquaries to the British Museum, where it was mounted and at once
exhibited to the general public.


                       DESCRIPTION OF THE STONE.

The Rosetta Stone in its present state is an irregularly-shaped slab of
compact black basalt, which measures about 3 feet 9 inches in length, 2
feet 4-1/2 inches in width, and 11 inches in thickness. The top right
and left hand corners, and the right hand bottom corner, are wanting.
It is not possible to say how much of the Stone is missing, but judging
by the proportion which exists between the lengths of the inscriptions
that are now upon it, we may assume that when it was complete it was at
least 12 inches longer than it is now. The upper end of the Stone was
probably rounded, and, if we may judge from the reliefs found on stelæ
of this class of the Ptolemaïc Period, the front of the rounded part
was sculptured with a figure of the Winged Disk of Horus of Edfû,
having pendent uraei, one wearing the Crown of the South, and the other
the Crown of the North. (See the Cast of the Decree of Canopus in Bay
28, No. 957.) Below the Winged Disk there may have been a relief, in
which the king was seen standing, with his queen, in the presence of a
series of gods, similar to that found on one of the copies mentioned
below of the inscriptions on the Rosetta Stone. Whatever the sculptured
decoration may have been, it is tolerably certain that, when the Stone
was in a complete state, it must have been between five and six feet in
height, and that when mounted upon a suitable plinth, and set up near
the statue of the king in whose honour it was engraved, it formed a
prominent monument in the temple in which it was set up.

The INSCRIPTION on the Rosetta Stone is written in two languages, that
is to say, in EGYPTIAN and in GREEK. The EGYPTIAN portion of it is cut
upon it in: I. the HIEROGLYPHIC CHARACTER, that is to say, in the old
picture writing which was employed from the earliest dynasties in
making copies of the Book of the Dead, and in nearly all state and
ceremonial documents that were intended to be seen by the public; and
II. the DEMOTIC CHARACTER, that is to say, the conventional,
abbreviated and modified form of the HIERATIC character, or cursive
form of hieroglyphic writing, which was in use in the Ptolemaïc Period.
The GREEK portion of the inscription is cut in ordinary uncials. The
hieroglyphic text consists of 14 lines only, and these correspond to
the last 28 lines of the Greek text. The Demotic text consists of 32
lines, the first 14 being imperfect at the beginnings, and the Greek
text consists of 54 lines, the last 26 being imperfect at the ends. A
large portion of the missing lines of the hieroglyphic text can be
restored from a stele discovered in 1898 at Damanhûr in the Delta
(Hermopolis Parva), and now in the Egyptian Museum in Cairo (No. 5576),
and from the copy of a text of the Decree cut on the walls of a temple
at Philæ, and the correctness of the restorations of broken passages in
the Demotic and Greek texts being evident, we are justified in assuming
that we have the inscription of the Rosetta Stone complete both in
Egyptian and Greek.


             THE EARLIEST DECIPHERERS OF THE ROSETTA STONE.

The first translation of the Greek text was made by the Rev. Stephen
Weston, and was read by him before the Society of Antiquaries of London
in April, 1802. This was quickly followed by a French translation made
by “citizen Du Theil,” who declared that the Stone was “a monument of
the gratitude of some priests of Alexandria, or some neighbouring
place, towards Ptolemy Epiphanes”; and a Latin translation by “citizen
Ameilhon” appeared in Paris in the spring of 1803. The first studies of
the Demotic text were those of Silvestre de Sacy and Åkerblad in 1802,
and the latter succeeded in making out the general meaning of portions
of the opening lines, and in identifying the equivalents of the names
of Alexander, Alexandria, Ptolemy, Isis, etc. Both de Sacy and Åkerblad
began their labours by attacking the Demotic equivalents of the
cartouches, i.e. the ovals containing royal names in the hieroglyphic
text. In 1818 Dr. Thomas Young compiled for the fourth volume of the
“Encyclopædia Britannica” (published in 1819) the results of his
studies of the texts on the Rosetta Stone, and among them was a list of
several alphabetic Egyptian characters to which, in most cases, he had
assigned correct values. He was the first to grasp the idea of a
phonetic principle in the reading of the Egyptian hieroglyphs, and he
was the first to apply it to their decipherment. Warburton, de Guignes,
Barthélemy and Zoëga all suspected the existence of alphabetic
hieroglyphics, and the three last-named scholars believed that the
oval, or cartouche [blank cartouche], contained a proper, or royal
name. But it was Young who first proved both points, and successfully
deciphered the name of Ptolemy on the Rosetta Stone, and that of
Berenice on another monument. Another successful decipherer at this
time was Mr. J. W. Bankes, who, in 1818, deciphered the name of
Cleopatra on the granite obelisk that he had excavated at Philæ in
1815. In 1822 the list of alphabetic Egyptian characters that had been
drawn up by Young was corrected and greatly enlarged by J. F.
Champollion, who, between that date and the year of his death,
correctly deciphered the hieroglyphic forms of the names and titles of
most of the Roman Emperors, and drew up a classified list of Egyptian
hieroglyphs, and formulated a system of grammar and general
decipherment which is the foundation whereon all later Egyptologists
have worked. The discovery of the correct alphabetic values of Egyptian
signs was most useful for reading names, but for translating the
Egyptian language a competent knowledge of Coptic was required. Now
Coptic is only a name meaning “Egyptian.” The Egyptians who embraced
Christianity after the preaching of Saint Mark at Alexandria are called
“Copts,” and the translations of the Holy Scriptures, Liturgies, etc.,
which they made from Greek into their native Egyptian language soon
after their conversion to Christianity, are said to be written in
“Coptic.” The knowledge of Coptic has never been lost, and a
comparatively large sacred literature has always been available in
manuscripts for study by scholars. Champollion, whilst still a youth in
the early years of the nineteenth century, realized the great
importance of Coptic for the purpose of Egyptian decipherment, and he
studied it to such good purpose that he became an authority on the
language and literature of the Copts. In his studies of the inscription
on the Rosetta Stone, his knowledge of Coptic enabled him to deduce the
phonetic values of many syllabic signs, and to assign correct readings
to many pictorial characters, the meanings of which were made known to
him by the Greek text on the Stone.


                        METHOD OF DECIPHERMENT.

The method by which the greater part of the Egyptian alphabet was
recovered is this: It was assumed correctly that the oval [blank
cartouche], or “cartouche” as it is called, always contained a royal
name. There is only one cartouche (five times repeated with slight
modifications) on the Rosetta Stone, and this was assumed to contain
the name of Ptolemy, because it was certain from the Greek text that
the inscription concerned a Ptolemy. It was also assumed that if the
cartouche did contain the name of Ptolemy, the characters in it would
have the sounds of the Greek letters, and that all together they would
represent the Greek form of the name of Ptolemy. Now on the obelisk
which Mr. Bankes had brought from Philæ there is an inscription in two
languages, Egyptian and Greek. In the Greek portion of it two royal
names are mentioned, that is to say, Ptolemy and Cleopatra, and on the
second face of the obelisk there are two cartouches, which occur close
together, and are filled with hieroglyphs which, it was assumed, formed
the Egyptian equivalents of these names. When these cartouches were
compared with the cartouche on the Rosetta Stone it was found that one
of them contained hieroglyphic characters that were almost identical
with those which filled the cartouche on the Rosetta Stone. Thus there
was good reason to believe that the cartouche on the Rosetta Stone
contained the name of Ptolemy written in hieroglyphic characters. The
forms of the cartouches are as follows:

        On the Rosetta Stone         [cartouche]
        On the Obelisk from Philæ    [cartouche]

The second of these cartouches contains the sign [glyph], which is
wanting in the first, and the single sign [glyph] takes the place of
the three signs [glyph] at the end of the first cartouche. Now it has
already been said that the name of Cleopatra was found in Greek on the
Philæ Obelisk, and the cartouche which was assumed to contain the
Egyptian equivalent of this name appears in this form:

                              [cartouche]

Taking the cartouches which were supposed to contain the names of
Ptolemy and Cleopatra from the Philæ Obelisk, and numbering the signs
we have:

          Ptolemy, A.     [cartouche]
          Cleopatra, B.   [cartouche]

Now we see at a glance that No. 1 in A and No. 5 in B are identical,
and judging by their position only in the names they must represent the
letter P. No. 4 in A and No. 2 in B are identical, and arguing as
before from their position they must represent the letter L. As L is
the second letter in the name of Cleopatra, the sign No. 1 [glyph] must
represent K. Now in the cartouche of Cleopatra we know the values of
Signs Nos. 1, 2 and 5, so we may write them down as thus:

                              [cartouche]

In the Greek form of the name of Cleopatra there are two vowels between
the L and the P, and in the hieroglyphic form there are two
hieroglyphs, [glyph] and [glyph], so we may assume that [glyph] = E and
[glyph] = O. In some forms of the cartouche of Cleopatra No. 7 [glyph]
is replaced by [glyph], which is identical with No. 2 in A and No. 10
in B. As T follows P in the name Ptolemy, and as there is a T in the
Greek form of the name of Cleopatra, we may assume that [glyph] and
[glyph] have substantially the same sound, and that that sound is T. In
the Greek form of the name Cleopatra there are two a’s, the positions
of which agree with No. 6 and No. 9, and we may assume that [glyph] has
the value of A. Substituting these values for the hieroglyphs in B we
may write it as thus:

                              [cartouche]

Thomas Young noticed that the two signs [glyph] always followed the
name of a goddess, queen, or princess, and the other early decipherers
regarded the two signs as a mere feminine termination. The only sign
for which we have no phonetic equivalent is No. 8 [glyph] and it is
obvious that this must represent R. Inserting this value in the
cartouche we have the name of Cleopatra deciphered. Applying now the
values which we have learned from the cartouche of Cleopatra to the
cartouche of Ptolemy we may write it as thus:

                              [cartouche]

We now see that the cartouche must be that of Ptolemy, but it is also
clear that there must be contained in it many other hieroglyphs which
do not form part of his name. Champollion found other forms of the
cartouche of Ptolemy, and the simplest of them was written thus:
[cartouche]. It was therefore evident that the other signs [glyph] were
royal titles corresponding to those found in the Greek text on the
Rosetta Stone meaning “ever-living, beloved of Ptah.” Now the Greek
form of the name Ptolemy, i.e. Ptolemaios, ends with S. We may assume
therefore that the last sign in the simplest form of the cartouche
given above has the phonetic value of S. The only hieroglyphs now
doubtful are [glyph] and [glyph], and their position in the name of
Ptolemy suggests that their phonetic values must be M and some vowel
sound in which the I sound predominates. These values, which were
arrived at by guessing and deduction, were applied by the early
decipherers to other cartouches, e.g.:

               1.    [cartouche]
               2.    [cartouche]

Now, in No. 1, we can at once write down the values of all the signs,
viz., P .  I .  L . A  . T .  R  .  A, which is obviously the Greek
name Philotera. In No. 2 we only know some of the hieroglyphs, and we
write the cartouche thus: [cartouche]. Now we know that [glyph] occurs
in the name Berenice, and that it represents N, and that [glyph] is the
last word of the transcript of the Greek title “Kaisaros,” and that it
therefore represents some S sound. Some of the forms of the cartouche
of Cleopatra begin with [glyph], and it is clear that its phonetic
value must be K. Inserting these values in the above cartouche we have:

                              [cartouche]

which is clearly meant to represent the name “Alexandros,” or
Alexander. The position of the sign [glyph] shows that it represented
some sound of E or A.

Returning to the signs [glyph] which we have assumed to represent the
royal titles “ever-living, beloved of Ptah,” we have to decide whether
this assumption be correct or not. It was known by tradition and from
Coptic Vocabularies that the old Egyptian word for “life” or “living,”
was “ānkh,” or “ōnkh,” and that it was represented by the symbol
[glyph] which occurs several times in the inscriptions. It was
therefore guessed that the next signs [glyph] meant “ever.” The Coptic
Vocabularies state that one of the old Egyptian words for “ever, age,
eternity,” was Djet, and as we already know that the phonetic value of
the second sign in the word is T, we may assume that the value of
[glyph] is DJ, or TJ. The third sign [glyph] is a “determinative,” and
was not pronounced. Thus the first title [glyph] means “living ever,”
or “ever-living.” Of the remaining signs [glyph] we know that the two
first are P and T, i.e. the first two letters of the name of Ptah; the
third sign [glyph] must then have the value of H or something like it.
If the signs [glyph] form the name of Ptah, then the sign which follows
them must mean “loving,” or “loved.” Here again the Coptic helped the
early decipherers in assigning a phonetic value to [glyph], for the
Coptic word for to love is “mere,” ϻϵρϵ, and they assumed that the
value of the sign was “mer.” Now in the cartouche of Ptolemy on the
Rosetta Stone after the name Ptah [glyph], we have the signs [glyph],
and these are, clearly, a variant of [glyph]. We already know that
[glyph] = I, and therefore [glyph] must be the equivalent of [glyph]
and have the value of “mer.” By the comparison of texts containing
variant forms, and by the skilful use of his knowledge of Coptic,
Champollion succeeded in formulating the system of decipherment of
Egyptian hieroglyphs that is, substantially, that in use at the present
day.


         THE CONTENTS OF THE INSCRIPTION ON THE ROSETTA STONE.

The inscription on the Rosetta Stone is a copy of the Decree passed by
the General Council of Egyptian priests assembled at Memphis to
celebrate the first commemoration of the coronation of Ptolemy V,
Epiphanes, king of all Egypt. The young king had been crowned in the
eighth year of his reign, therefore the first commemoration took place
in the ninth year, in the spring of the year B.C. 196. The original
form of the Decree is given by the Demotic section, and the
Hieroglyphic and Greek versions were made from it.

The inscription is dated on the fourth day of the Greek month Xandikos
(April), corresponding to the eighteenth day of the Egyptian month
Meshir, or Mekhir, of the ninth year of the reign of Ptolemy V,
Epiphanes, the year in which Aetus, the son of Aetus, was chief priest
and Pyrrha, the daughter of Philinus, and Areia, the daughter of
Diogenes, and Irene, the daughter of Ptolemy, were chief priestesses.
The opening lines are filled with a list of the titles of Ptolemy V,
and a series of epithets which proclaim the king’s piety towards the
gods, and his love for the Egyptians and his country. In the second
section of the inscription the priests enumerate the benefits which he
had conferred upon Egypt, and which may be thus summarized:

     1. Gifts of money and corn to the temples.

     2. Gifts of endowments to temples.

     3. Remission of one half of taxes due to the Government.

     4. Abolition of one half of the taxes.

     5. Forgiveness of debts owed by the people to the Government.

     6. Release of the prisoners who had been languishing in gaol
        for years.

     7. Abolition of the press-gang for sailors.

     8. Reduction of fees payable by candidates for the priesthood.

     9. Reduction of the dues payable by the temples to the
        Government.

    10. Restoration of the services in the temples.

    11. Forgiveness of rebels, who were permitted to return to Egypt
        and live there.

    12. Despatch of troops by sea and land against the enemies of
        Egypt.

    13. The siege and conquest of the town of Shekan (Lycopolis).

    14. Forgiveness of the debts owed by the priests to him.

    15. Reduction of the tax on byssus.

    16. Reduction of the tax on corn lands.

    17. Restoration of the temples of the Apis and Mnevis Bulls, and
        of the other sacred animals.

    18. Rebuilding of ruined shrines and sacred buildings, and
        providing them with endowments.

As a mark of the gratitude of the priesthood to the king for all these
gracious acts of Ptolemy V, it was decided by the General Council of
the priests of Egypt to “increase the ceremonial observances of honour
which are paid to Ptolemy, the ever-living, in the temples.” With this
object in view it was decided:

     1. To make statues of Ptolemy in his character of “Saviour
        of Egypt,” and to set up one in every temple of Egypt
        for the priests and people to worship.

     2. To make figures of Ptolemy [in gold], and to place them
        in gold shrines, which are to be set side by side with
        the shrines of the gods, and carried about in
        procession with them.

     3. To distinguish the shrine of Ptolemy by means of ten
        double-crowns of gold which are to be placed upon it.

     4. To make the anniversaries of the birthday and
        coronation days of Ptolemy, viz., the XVIIth and the
        XXXth days of the month Mesore, festival days for ever.

     5. To make the first five days of the month of Thoth days
        of festival for ever; offerings shall be made in the
        temples, and all the people shall wear garlands.

     6. To add a new title to the titles of the priests, viz.,
        “Priests of the beneficent god Ptolemy Epiphanes, who
        appeareth on earth,” which is to be cut upon the ring
        of every priest of Ptolemy, and inserted in every
        priestly document.

     7. That the soldiers may borrow the shrines with figures
        of Ptolemy inside them from the temples, and may take
        them to their quarters, and carry them about in
        procession.

     8. That copies of this Decree shall be cut upon slabs of
        basalt in the “writing of the speech of the god,” i.e.
        hieroglyphs, and in the writing of the books, i.e.
        demotic, and in the writing of the Ueienin, i.e. Greek.
        “And a basalt slab on which a copy of this Decree is
        cut shall be set up in the temples of the first, second
        and third orders, side by side with the statue of
        Ptolemy, the ever-living god.”

                                               E. A. WALLIS BUDGE.


  Department of Egyptian and Assyrian Antiquities,
                   July 12th, 1913.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Rosetta Stone, by E. A. Wallis Budge

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ROSETTA STONE ***

***** This file should be named 48649-0.txt or 48649-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/8/6/4/48649/

Produced by Elizabeth Oscanyan and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

