The Project Gutenberg EBook of Tonto National Monument: Arizona, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.



Title: Tonto National Monument: Arizona
       Tonto Cliff Dwellings Guide, 11th Edition, Revised

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: June 11, 2015 [EBook #49192]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TONTO NATIONAL MONUMENT: ARIZONA ***




Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, Dave Morgan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                 20 CENTS IF YOU TAKE THIS BOOKLET HOME




                      tonto cliff dwellings guide


                        TONTO NATIONAL MONUMENT
                                ARIZONA

                [Illustration: _The Lower Ruin in 1910_
                  Lubken photo, courtesy H. B. Clark]


Although Tonto National Monument was established in 1907 it received
little protection until 1930. Considerable vandalism and thoughtless
destruction of much of the prehistoric material took place in the 1920s.

In recent years some prehistoric Indian ruins have had to be closed to
visitors to preserve these fragile structures. Please help us keep the
Lower Ruin open for many years to come: restrain children from climbing
and running in the dwelling, and keep off the walls.




                      HOW TO USE YOUR TRAIL GUIDE


Along the trail and in the ruin are numbered stakes indicating features
of interest. Corresponding numbered paragraphs in this booklet describe
them.

     [Illustration: _Typical Desert Landscape and the Lower Ruin_]




                              TONTO TRAIL


Brutal heat in summer, hard frosts in winter, strong shrivelling winds
of spring, and always erratic rainfall combine here to make a desert, a
place of extremes. The world’s arid lands are of many kinds; here is the
Upper Sonoran Desert, with its giant cactus and remarkably varied plant
life. Here are found many creatures which have adapted in behavior or
body features to arid conditions. Man too has evolved in the desert in
many ways, over at least ten thousand years, from roving bands of
primitive hunters to the massive urban developments of today.

Nearly seven hundred years ago farming Indians now called the Salado
(sa-LAH-doe) fitted their lives to this desert. They lived in cool,
thick-walled apartment-like villages, grew irrigated crops of corn,
squash, beans, cotton and amaranth (pigweed), made handsome pottery and
wove elaborate cotton textiles. Though capable farmers, the Salado were
also hunters and gatherers, well aware of the uses to be made of the
desert’s wild resources.

As you walk the winding half-mile trail to the Lower Ruin you will see
many desert plants used by the Salado so long ago, some of the birds,
and perhaps other wild creatures of the desert which are active during
the day.

Take time to breathe the fragrant dry air of the desert, look about you,
enjoy just being, listen to the silence. Don’t feel bound to reading
this little book; this is simply a guide to some of what you will see.
We hope that you will see—and feel—much more.

1 BABY SAGUARO. This little white-spined cactus, an infant less than ten
years old now, will grow up in a hundred years or so to look like the
towering giants scattered over these hills. Young saguaros (sah-WAR-ohs)
are delicate and need a “nurse tree” like this mesquite to shelter them
from the sun.

2 HEDGEHOG CACTUS. The first cactus to bloom each spring; the large
magenta blossoms of this many-headed plant must have been a welcome
sight to the Salado, for they signalled relief to come from the
monotonous winter diet of dried foods.

3 BARREL CACTUS. Though the barrel cactus is fabled as a source of
emergency water in the desert, it is not at all reliable. The amount of
unpleasant-tasting liquid in it varies with the amount and recency of
rainfall.

Not much use was made of the barrel cactus; its fruit is unpalatable,
but several finger rings made of its hooked red spines were found in the
cliff dwelling. Recent desert Indians sometimes made cooking pots of the
barrel: they cut off its top and removed some of the pulp from the
stump, then put food in the cavity and dropped in hot stones to cook it.

4 TESAJO (tess-AH-hoe). Tiny edible tomato-red fruits, ready in November
and December, give this little member of the cholla (CHOY-ya) cactus
group its other name: Christmas cactus.

5 YUCCA (YUH-ca). This very useful plant provides many things. Leaf
fibers make strong thread for mats, string, rope, sandals, nets and
snares; the buds, flowers, fruit, stalks and seeds are edible. The root
contains saponin, useful as a medicine or as soap or an excellent
shampoo. Sharp leaf tips make good awls.

                        [Illustration: _Yucca_]

[Illustration: _A prehistoric sandal woven of loosely spun yucca fiber._]

              [Illustration: _Mesquite leaves and beans_]

6 MESQUITE. Pods and beans of the mesquite (mes-KEET), nutritious and
sweet, are still an important part of the desert Indian’s diet. Pods are
ground into flour and pressed to make little loaves of staple bread.
Fermented, the same flour makes an intoxicating drink. The sweet sap of
the tree can be used to make candy, black dye, or even glue for broken
pottery.

Mesquite has invaded vast areas during the past century, areas once
desert grasslands. Cattle, grazing this land since the 1870s, have eaten
away the grasses, encouraging growth of woody species like mesquite. The
sweet mesquite pods are a favorite cattle food, and the beans pass
unharmed through the digestive tract to be deposited far and wide. A
natural cycle of drought and erosion coupled with heavy grazing has
destroyed much of the desert grassland and converted it to mesquite.
With loss of the grasses, erosion has accelerated, springs have dried
up, and formerly sandy and smooth canyon floors (once suitable for
small-scale farming) have eroded to boulder-strewn wastes. In less than
a century we have made drastic changes in the desert, changes whose
consequences we are only beginning to see.

7 SOTOL. Mats, sandals, coarse ropes and other household items can be
made of the fibers in the narrow leaves of this plant. Young flower
stalks of sotol (SO-tall) are edible when roasted; many deep stone-lined
roasting pits are found throughout this area.

            [Illustration: _Sotol leaf and fruiting stem._]

8 LICHENS (LIE-kens). The green and orange blotches resembling paint on
this boulder are lichens, plants consisting of an alga and a fungus
living together. As the plants grow, their secretions begin dissolving
solid rock into fragments, the first step in the long natural process of
soil formation. It has been estimated that in the desert it takes 1,000
years to develop one inch of topsoil.

9 OCOTILLO (oh-ko-TEE-yo). This thorny member of the candlewood family
(NOT a cactus!) has handsome orange-red flowers at the ends of each
branch in spring. Orioles[1], hummingbirds and bumblebees love ocotillo
nectar. Like the palo verde, the ocotillo drops its leaves to conserve
moisture while its green bark carries on a minimum of food manufacture.
Within a few days of a good rain it sprouts a whole new set of leaves,
only to shed them again as soon as the soil dries. The plant may develop
and shed a half dozen sets of leaves in a single growing season.

10 SAGUARO SKELETON. The Salado built roofs and fashioned tools from the
wooden ribs of saguaro skeletons, such as those in various states of
decomposition up the draw above you. Skeletons also supplied wood for
household fires in an area with few other fuel sources.

11 CANE CHOLLA. Flower buds of many types of cholla are edible; Pima
Indians, modern desert farmers living near Phoenix, steam them as
vegetables. The curve-bill thrasher builds its untidy nest in this
cholla.

12 JOJOBA (ho-HO-ba). Moisture is retained in these large leaves by a
thick wax coating. The jojoba’s large oily nuts, slightly resembling a
peanut in size and shape, can be eaten raw or parched; early settlers
used them as a coffee substitute, giving the shrub the name
“coffeeberry.” The plant is an important browse for white-tail and mule
deer.

               [Illustration: _Jojoba leaves and fruit_]

13 SAGUARO. These magnificent giants are indicator plants of the Sonoran
Desert. Saguaros produce a beautiful white blossom which has been
designated the Arizona State Flower. Its bright red fruit is edible.

Saguaros grow as high as 50 feet and more, and may live as long as 200
years. After a good rain, large saguaros may weigh several tons. Their
roots are shallow—not more than three feet deep—which allows rapid
absorption of ground-surface moisture. The pleated skin expands,
accordion-like, as the inner pulp swells with absorbed water.

The Gila woodpecker is responsible for many of the holes you see
riddling mature saguaros; the bird will excavate a half-dozen or more
potential nests every year. Other birds use the woodpecker holes,
particularly the elf owl, a six-inch midget which can live only where
the saguaro and the woodpecker provide it with a home.

                  [Illustration: _Saguaro blossoms._]

                      [Illustration: _The Annex._]

14 THE ANNEX. Look above you, at the base of the cliff; do you see a
five-foot manmade wall? Once there was a Salado village in the shallow
recess above; it was contemporary with the Lower Ruin just around the
corner and probably housed its population overflow. There were about a
dozen rooms in the Annex, traceable from tiny fragments of walls and
plaster room outlines. Because the recess is so shallow and offers
little shelter, the Annex was destroyed by weather long ago. What you
see from the trail here is all there is to see.

15 TEDDYBEAR CHOLLA. Imagine the misery this cactus gave the
scantily-clad Salados as they moved about gathering wild food and
hunting deer and other creatures. The teddybear’s joints break off very
easily and stick to a victim at the slightest contact, even seeming to
jump at a victim, hence its other name, “jumping cactus.” Cholla spines
penetrate deeply and are very painful to remove; remember—people who
stay on the trail stay out of the way of the cholla. The noisy cactus
wren somehow makes use of the teddybear as a nesting site, and the
woodrat drags cholla joints home with which to barricade his burrow.

16 CEMENTED ROCK. This rock broke away from the cliff above and rolled
here. The diagram explains the geology; broken, faulted Dripping Spring
Formation rocks, here mostly quartzites, were overlain by a layer of
limestone; water percolating through the limestone dissolved materials
which then seeped down through the fragmented rocks and, drying,
cemented the broken bits together, as in the boulder here.

          [Illustration: _Sketch of Geological Cross-section._
 Showing: Mescal Limestone, Dripping Springs Quartzite, The Lower Ruin,
                Mudstone, “Cemented Rock”, Recent Talus]

 [Illustration: _Overhanging roof of natural cave preserved the ruin._]

17 FORMATION OF THE CAVE. Under the shattered quartzite was a layer of
soft mudstone. Rain and seepage dissolved the mudstone, removing support
below the quartzite, which then fell away from the cliff. Gradually this
natural erosion enlarged the cave you see today. When the Salado came
seeking a protected place to live they found a natural cave some 50 feet
deep, 40 feet high, and 85 feet long, littered with all the building
stone they needed.

18 BASEMENT ROOMS. Outside and below the cave were 3 or 4 “basement”
rooms, probably houses identical to those in the cave and the Annex. The
cave village itself contained about 20 rooms originally, the exact
number uncertain because rooms toward the front of the dwelling have
weathered away. With the Annex, basement rooms and cave village counted
together, there were about 40 rooms (houses) in this immediate area.
While population estimates are difficult to make with accuracy, probably
between 40 and 60 people lived here long ago.

      [Illustration: _Fragmentary walls of the “basement” rooms._]

19 THE ORIGINAL ENTRY. Above you is a V-shaped notch which was probably
the only original entrance to the village. A ladder from the roof of a
basement room led to the passage above, where projecting rocks are
polished from long use as handholds and footrests. When the Indians
wanted to close the village door, they simply pulled up the ladder.

       [Illustration: _The notch which was the original entry._]

Salado children who scrambled in and out of this entryway knew the
dangers of these loose rocky slopes, but our children are much less
aware of the slope’s hazards. For your children’s safety, please keep
them with you. Leaving the trail or running on it invites injury.

As you go up the modern stairs, note the retaining wall; it is probably
closely similar to the original wall. The village once extended out as
far as the retaining wall, rooms dividing what is now open space at the
front of the cave, but the original rooms and wall have eroded away.

20 THE ANCIENT SCENE. Think back 700 years and imagine this view then;
no power lines, no roads, no lake, no smog. This spectacular view of the
Salt River Valley provided a fine defensive outlook. We do not know
who—or what—drove the Salado to the high places, but this village and
others like it seem to have been built for defense. Little evidence of
warfare has been found.

 [Illustration: _Once four or five rooms were here in the front of the
   cave; erosion has destroyed all but the wall stubs you see on the
                                right._]

Because the ruin is easily visible from the valley it was quickly
discovered, probably by ranchers in the 1870s. The first written record
of the Tonto ruins appeared in 1883, by which time they were well known.

The cliff dwelling overlooks the valley where Salado farms were
tilled—1,000 feet below the village here, and 2 to 5 miles away. Ancient
irrigation canals which watered Salado corn could still be seen until
Roosevelt Lake flooded the valley after 1911. To walk 5 miles or more to
tend a crop was not unusual for a Pueblo farmer. Well into this century
Hopi Indians, distant modern relatives of the ancient Salado, ran as far
as 20 miles to their cornfields.

21 TWO-STORY ROOM. The west wall of this two-story room is one of the
few that reached to the cave ceiling. The 3 beams mark the ceiling of
the room’s first floor, and 2 beam sockets higher up indicate the second
floor ceiling. Most rooms had a 3-foot-high parapet wall around the
roof, providing a safe place in the open air for work or play.

The small hole in the second floor wall overlooks the original entryway,
reminding us that this was probably a fortified village built during
troubled times.

 [Illustration: _Two-story room (note sealed doorway in first floor)_]

22 THE ENTRY HALL. If you stood here long ago, you might see a man
bringing home harvested corn, or game of some sort. Women might be
lugging heavy water jars up from the spring in the canyon. Small
children would play about your feet while their older sisters and
brothers solemnly imitated adult work.

The little unroofed room to your right is a fine example of the way the
Salado used the natural cave: here they simply built a curved wall
across a natural recess, creating a small unroofed room which was
apparently used for cooking, judging from the smoke-blackened walls and
the several firepits once found here.

                  [Illustration: _The entry passage._]

                [Illustration: _Room with half-T door._]

These people made many of their doorways in the half-T shape you see in
this little room. The half-T prevented strong drafts, and provided a
place to balance with one hand while stooping through the door. Salado
men averaged about 5 feet 6 inches tall, the women about 5 feet, so they
had as much difficulty as we do getting through these small doorways.

  [Illustration: _Original roofing timbers remain in portions of Lower
                                Ruin._]

23 PARTIAL ROOF. This large room contains a good example of Salado
roofing technique. Walls of stone and mud were built in courses about 2
feet high each, until they reached 6 feet in height. A central upright
post was then placed to hold a main roof beam. The smaller roof poles
rested on the main beam, and above them went a layer of reeds, saguaro
ribs, grass or other small poles. On top of these layers went a thick
mud coat, deep enough to allow a shallow firepit to be safely built in
the upstairs floor.

        [Illustration: _Hallway with partial mud-capped roof._]

24 HALLWAY. The village was not built all at once. Construction at
different times is revealed in sealed doorways, wall abutments, and
hallways. This passageway gave access to three rows of ground floor
rooms; it probably also served as additional storage space.

     [Illustration: _Interior roofing and hatchway to room above._]

                [Illustration: _Stone-lined hatchway._]

25 ORIGINAL ROOM. Look inside and imagine how dark and stuffy these
rooms were. Often ground-floor rooms in the back of the cave—dark and
poorly ventilated—were used just for storage. Ladders gave access to
different floor levels in the village, sometimes through corner
hatchways like the one in this room.

26 ROOM USES. During excavation of this village, an infant burial was
found in the corner of this room. The death rate among infants was high,
and burying babies in the corners of houses was the custom among Pueblo
Indians until quite recent times. Adults were usually buried in the
loose rock slope in front of the village or in abandoned rooms. Terraces
in front of some cliff dwellings served as burial grounds, but no
terrace or cemetery has been found here.

 [Illustration: _Connecting rooms in two-story section of ruin; burial
           was found in right-hand corner of farthest room._]

Although these rooms are small by our standards, there was no need among
the Salado for larger spaces; actually the Salado houses are remarkably
large in comparison to most cliff dwellings. Since the climate is mild
here, most of the Indians’ time was spent on the roofs and outdoors.
Houses served mainly for sleeping, storage, cooking, and winter shelter.
Salado furniture was minimal: a few pottery vessels, baskets, spare
tools, a metate and firepit, mats for sleeping and sitting, perhaps a
ladder to an upstairs room. Looms for weaving their elaborate cotton
textiles were apparently outdoors, as no trace of them was found in the
rooms.

   [Illustration: _Elaborate woven cotton shirt recovered from Tonto
                 Ruin—fine example of Salado weaving._
                Photo courtesy of Arizona State Museum]

 [Illustration: _Shells traded from the Gulf of California were carved
                          to make bracelets._]

[Illustration: _Dramatic geometric designs in black, white and red were
                  characteristic of Salado pottery._]

27 ORIGINAL CLAY FLOOR. All floors in the village were once smooth, made
of adobe clay like this one, but heavy traffic over recent years has
destroyed all but this one remnant. Please help us preserve this floor
by staying out of the room.

               [Illustration: _Cross-Section of a floor._
    Showing: outer wall; rock; clay floor; shallow firepit; bedrock]

At the back of the room the clay floor joins natural bedrock of the
cave. Because the cave floor was so irregular, the Indians had to build
retaining walls and fill to make a level spot for their homes. Wet clay
was spread on the fill to make, when dry, a smooth, level floor.

Note the little clay-lined firepit in the center of the room; it is only
about 6 inches deep and 5 across, but provided adequate heat and cooking
space.

28 METATE (meh-TAH-tay) and MANO (MAH-no). These Spanish words refer to
the stone tools used for grinding dried corn, seeds, mesquite pods, palo
verde beans and other foodstuffs. The small, hand-held stone is the
mano. We do not know what the Salado called these essential kitchen
tools, for their lost language was unwritten.

Imagine the many hours of hard work represented by the deep grooves worn
in this hard stone! Try it yourself: kneel and rub the mano back and
forth over the trough of the metate; think of doing such work for many
hours each day.

                   [Illustration: _Metate and mano._]

Can you see the broken metate that was used as a building stone? Look
above the barred door to the right, just below the stabilizing beam.

29 SMOKE-BLACKENED WALL. Just as we do spring cleaning, Salado women
frequently replastered their little houses with clay. Smoke from cooking
and heating fires blackened the wall, but you can still see here
hundreds of finger marks left as wet clay was smoothed by hand on the
wall.

             [Illustration: _Finger imprints in plaster._]

30 OPEN ROOM. The Indians did not build a roof for this room, because
the cave ceiling served the same purpose. Since this large room had good
light and ventilation, and offered space protected from the fierce
summer sun, it was probably used as a community work area. Two seed
grinders, called mortars, are worn into the bench-like bedrock in the
back.

     [Illustration: _A bedrock mortar in the community workroom._]

Any of the larger rooms in this village could have been used as meeting
rooms or ceremonial chambers, but after damage by early souvenir
hunters, no evidence of such use could be found during scientific
excavation of the village. Another ruin in the area had a large
rectangular room with an altar and other features indicating ceremonial
use. Pueblo Indian religion today is deeply threaded through all phases
of daily life, and these ancient Pueblos were undoubtedly equally
religious.

   [Illustration: _A view of the central section of the Lower Ruin_]


                           PLEASE BE CAREFUL
                     RETURNING TO THE PARKING AREA.




                            THE SALADO STORY


A thousand years ago the Salado first arrived in this basin, coming here
around A.D. 900 from the region north of the Little Colorado River
drainage. Though we do not know what they called themselves, it is here
where later they were given their modern name. In Spanish, Salado means
salty, referring to the Salt River near which these Indians lived.

When the Salado first entered the Roosevelt Basin they lived in the
lowlands, along the Salt River floodplain where they could easily
irrigate their fields. Though the area may seem inhospitable, the
river’s flow is reliable—and water is an extremely precious resource in
the arid Southwest. The great range of elevation nearby provides several
life zones of various plants and animals to be utilized for richer
living. Ponderosa pine forests and juniper-pinyon pine woodland both
occur within 15 miles of this site.

The Salado enjoyed several centuries of comfortable life, with time for
production of elaborately decorated pottery and ornaments, beautifully
woven and embroidered cotton textiles, and, no doubt, development of
elaborate religious thought and ritual.

But at about A.D. 1200, times changed and life became more difficult.
Perhaps the population outgrew its resources. Perhaps disease spread.
Perhaps some outside enemy pressure was felt. The reason remains
unknown, but in the early 13th century the Indians began moving their
villages to high ridges and ultimately to caves, finding defensible
protected sites with good, sweeping views.

Unsettled conditions persisted, and finally life here, for reasons we do
not know today, became impossible. Where they went, why they left, and
what their ultimate fate was, we do not know, but by the early 1400s the
Salado people were gone from the Salt River Valley.




                               FOOTNOTES


[1]A bird checklist is available; ask the ranger.


       PUBLISHED IN COOPERATION WITH THE NATIONAL PARK SERVICE BY
               SOUTHWEST PARKS AND MONUMENTS ASSOCIATION
                          POST OFFICE BOX 1562
                          GLOBE, ARIZONA 85501

                           11th Ed. (Revised)
                                1974 20M




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


—Under note 12, restored the omitted words “nuts, slightly resembling a”
  from a different edition of the guide.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.







End of Project Gutenberg's Tonto National Monument: Arizona, by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TONTO NATIONAL MONUMENT: ARIZONA ***

***** This file should be named 49192-0.txt or 49192-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/9/1/9/49192/

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, Dave Morgan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

