The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Subtropical Garden, by W. Robinson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Subtropical Garden;
       or, beauty of form in the flower garden.

Author: W. Robinson

Release Date: October 17, 2015 [EBook #50243]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SUBTROPICAL GARDEN ***




Produced by Shaun Pinder, Chuck Greif and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)












                        THE SUBTROPICAL GARDEN.




                      _Works by the same Author._


     =ALPINE FLOWERS FOR ENGLISH GARDENS.= With 70 Illustrations.

     =THE WILD GARDEN=, or our Groves and Shrubberies made beautiful by
     the naturalisation of hardy exotic plants. With _Frontispiece_.

     =MUSHROOM CULTURE=: its Extension and Improvement. With
     Illustrations.


                            _Nearly Ready._

     =HARDY FLOWERS; or, HERBACEOUS, BULBOUS, AND ALPINE PLANTS.= This
     will be the most comprehensive and practically instructive book
     ever published on these plants. With Frontispiece.

     =A CATALOGUE OF CULTIVATED HARDY PERENNIALS, BULBS, ANNUALS=, etc.,
     including also all British Plants. Prepared for the purpose of
     facilitating exchanges, &c., and enumerating nearly 10,000 hardy
     exotic and British plants.

                     [Illustration: FRONTISPIECE.]




                                  THE

                          SUBTROPICAL GARDEN;

                                  OR,

                         BEAUTY OF FORM IN THE
                            FLOWER GARDEN.

                        BY W. ROBINSON, F.L.S.,
 AUTHOR OF ‘ALPINE FLOWERS,’ ‘THE WILD GARDEN,’ ‘HARDY FLOWERS,’ ETC.

                          WITH ILLUSTRATIONS.

                                LONDON:
                    JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET.
                                 1871.

                _The right of Translation is reserved._

                                LONDON:

          PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, STAMFORD STREET
                          AND CHARING CROSS.




PREFACE.


This book is written with a view to assist the newly-awakened taste for
something more than mere colour in the flower-garden, by enumerating,
describing, indicating the best positions for, and giving the culture
of, all our materials for what is called “subtropical gardening.” This
not very happy, not very descriptive name, is adopted from its
popularity only; fortunately for our gardens numbers of subjects not
from subtropical climes may be employed with great advantage.
Subtropical gardening means the culture of plants with large and
graceful or remarkable foliage or habit, and the association of them
with the usually low-growing and brilliant flowering-plants now so
common in our gardens, and which frequently eradicate every trace of
beauty of form therein, making the flower-garden a thing of large masses
of colour only.

The guiding aim in this book has been the selection of really suitable
subjects, and the rejection of many that have been recommended and tried
for this purpose. This point is more important than at first sight would
appear, for in most of the literature hitherto devoted to the subject
plants entirely unsuitable are named. Thus we find such things as Alnus
glandulosa aurea and Ulmus campestris aurea (a form of the common elm)
enumerated among subtropical plants by one author. Manifestly if these
are admissible almost every species of plant is equally so. These belong
to a class of variegated hardy subjects that have been in our gardens
for ages, and have nothing whatever to do with subtropical gardening.
Two other classes have also purposely been omitted: very tender
stove-plants, many of which have been tried in vain in the Paris and
London Parks, and such things as Echeveria secunda, which though
belonging to a type frequently enumerated among subtropical plants, are,
more properly, subjects of the bedding class. But if I have excluded
many that I know to be unsuitable, every type of the vegetation of
northern and temperate countries has been searched for valuable kinds;
and as no tropical or subtropical subject that is really effective has
been omitted, the result is the most complete selection that is possible
from the plants now in cultivation.

No pains have been spared to show by the aid of illustrations the beauty
of form displayed by the various types of plants herein enumerated. For
some of the illustrations I have to thank MM. Vilmorin and Andrieux, the
well-known Parisian firm; for others, the proprietors of the ‘Field;’
while the rest are from the graceful pencil of Mr. Alfred Dawson, and
engraved by Mr. Whymper and Mr. W. Hooper. I felt that engravings would
be of more than their usual value in this book, inasmuch as they place
the best attainable result before the reader’s eye, thus enabling him to
arrange his materials more efficiently. A small portion of the matter of
this book originally appeared in my book on the gardens of Paris, in
which it will not again be printed. For the extensive list of the
varieties of Canna I am indebted to M. Chatè’s “_Le Canna_.” Most of the
subjects have been described from personal knowledge of them, both in
London and Paris gardens.

W. R.

_April 3, 1871._




CONTENTS.


PART I.

                                                                    PAGE

INTRODUCTION AND GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS                                1


PART II.

DESCRIPTION, ARRANGEMENT, CULTURE, ETC., OF
SUITABLE SPECIES, HARDY AND TENDER, ALPHABETICALLY
ARRANGED                                                              43


PART III.

SELECTIONS OF PLANTS FOR VARIOUS PURPOSES                            221




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.

_Separate plates to face the pages given._


                                                                    PAGE

_Frontispiece_--Hardy and
tender Plants in the Subtropical
Garden.

Cannas in a London park                                               13

Anemone japonica alba                                                 17

Group and single specimens
of plants isolated on the
grass                                                                 23

Portion of plan showing
Yuccas, etc.                                                          25

Formal arrangements in
London parks                                                          26

Tree Ferns and other Stove
Plants                                                                28

Ailantus and Cannas                                                   30

Young Conifers, etc.                                                  32

Gourds                                                                34

Section of raised bed at
Battersea                                                             40

Acanthus latifolius                                                   47

Aralia canescens                                                      58

Aralia japonica                                                       60

Aralia papyrifera                                                     61

Asplenium Nidus-avis                                                  70

Bambusa aurea                                                         72

Bambusa falcata                                                       74

Berberis nepalensis                                                   79

Blechnum brasiliense                                                  80

Bocconia cordata                                                      81

Buphthalmum speciosum                                                 83

Caladium esculentum                                                   84

Colocasia odorata                                                     85

Canna                                                                 86

Carlina acaulis                                                      110

Caryota sobolifera                                                   111

Centaurea babylonica                                                 112

Chamædorea                                                           114

Chamærops excelsa                                                    116

Cycas                                                                120

Tree Fern                                                            123

Dimorphanthus mandschuricus                                          124

Erianthus Ravennæ                                                    132

Ferula communis                                                      136

Ficus elastica                                                       139

Gynerium argenteum                                                   142

Gunnera scabra                                                       144

Heracleum                                                            147

Malva crispa                                                         153

Melianthus major                                                     155

Monstera deliciosa                                                   156

Montagnæa heracleifolia                                              157

Morina longifolia                                                    158

Mulgedium alpinum                                                    159

Musa Ensete                                                          160

Nicotiana Tabacum                                                    163

Onopordum Acanthium                                                  164

Poa fertilis                                                         174

Rheum Emodi                                                          178

Rhus glabra laciniata                                                180

Seaforthia elegans                                                   185

Solanum robustum                                                     190

Solanum Warscewiczii                                                 195

Uhdea bipinnatifida                                                  205

Wigandia macrophylla                                                 208

Yucca filamentosa                                                    212

Yucca pendula                                                        214

Yucca filamentosa variegata                                          217




PART I.


INTRODUCTION AND GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS.




SUBTROPICAL GARDENING.




INTRODUCTION AND GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS.


The system of garden-decoration popularly known as “Subtropical,” and
which simply means the use in gardens of plants having large and
handsome leaves, noble habit, or graceful port, has taught us the value
of grace and verdure amid masses of low, brilliant, and unrelieved
flowers, and has reminded us how far we have diverged from Nature’s ways
of displaying the beauty of vegetation, our love for rude colour having
led us to ignore the exquisite and inexhaustible way in which plants are
naturally arranged. In a wild state brilliant blossoms are usually
relieved by a setting of abundant green; and even where mountain and
meadow plants of one kind produce a wide blaze of colour at one season,
there is intermingled a spray of pointed grass and other leaves, which
tone down the mass and quite separate it from anything shown by what is
called the “bedding system” in gardens. When we come to examine the
most charming examples of our own indigenous or any other wild
vegetation, we find that their attraction mainly depends on flower and
fern, trailer, shrub, and tree, sheltering, supporting, relieving and
beautifying each other, so that the whole array has an indefinite tone,
and the mind is satisfied with the refreshing mystery of the
arrangement.

We may be pleased by the wide spread of purple on a heath or mountain,
but when we go near and examine it in detail, we find that its most
exquisite aspect is seen in places where the long moss cushions itself
beside the ling, and the fronds of the Polypody peer forth around little
masses of heather. Everywhere we see Nature judicious in the arrangement
of her highest effects, setting them in clouds of verdant leafage, so
that monotony is rarely produced--a state of things which it is highly
desirable to attain as far as possible in the garden.

We cannot attempt to reproduce this literally--nor would it be wise or
convenient to do so--but assuredly herein will be found the chief source
of true beauty and interest in our gardens as well as in those of
Nature; and the more we keep this fact before our eyes, the nearer will
be our approach to truth and success.

Nature _in puris naturalibus_ we cannot have in our gardens, but
Nature’s laws should not be violated; and few human beings have
contravened them more than our flower-gardeners during the past twenty
years. We should compose from Nature, as landscape artists do. We may
have in our gardens--and without making wildernesses of them either--all
the shade, the relief, the grace, the beauty, and nearly all the
irregularity of Nature.

Subtropical gardening has shown us that one of the greatest mistakes
ever made in the flower-garden was the adoption of a few varieties of
plants for culture on a vast scale, to the exclusion of interest and
variety, and, too often, of beauty or taste. We have seen how well the
pointed, tapering leaves of the Cannas carry the eye upwards; how
refreshing it is to cool the eyes in the deep green of those thoroughly
tropical Castor-oil plants, with their gigantic leaves; how grand the
Wigandia, with its wrought-iron texture and massive outline, looks,
after we have surveyed brilliant hues and richly-painted leaves; how
greatly the sweeping palm-leaves beautify the British flower-garden;
and, in a word, the system has shown us the difference between the
gardening that interests and delights all beholders, as well as the mere
horticulturist, and that which is too often offensive to the eye of
taste, and pernicious to every true interest of what Bacon calls the
“purest of humane pleasures.”

But are we to adopt this system in its purity? as shown, for example, by
Mr. Gibson when superintendent of Battersea Park. Certainly not. It is
evident, that to accommodate it to private gardens an expense and a
revolution of appliances would be necessary, which are in nearly all
cases quite impossible, and if possible, hardly desirable. We can,
however, introduce into our gardens most of its better features; we can
vary their contents, and render them more interesting by a better and
nobler system. The use of all plants without any particular and striking
habit, or foliage, or other desirable peculiarity, merely because they
are natives of very hot countries, should be tabooed at once, as tending
to make much work, and to return--a lot of weeds; for “weediness” is all
that I can ascribe to many Solanums and stove plants, of no real merit,
which have been employed under this name. Selection of the most
beautiful and useful from the great mass of plants known to science is
one of the most important of the horticulturist’s duties, and in no
branch must he exercise it more thoroughly than in this. Some of the
plants used are indispensable--the different kinds of Ricinus, Cannas in
great variety, Polymnia, Colocasia, Uhdea, Wigandia, Ferdinanda, Palms,
Yuccas, Dracænas, and fine-leaved plants of coriaceous texture
generally. A few specimens of these may be accommodated in many gardens;
they will embellish the houses in winter, and, transferred to the open
garden in summer, will lend interest to it when we are tired of the
houses. Some Palms, like Seaforthia, may be used with the best effect
for the winter decoration of the conservatory, and be placed out with a
good result, and without danger, in summer. Many fine kinds of Dracænas,
Yuccas, Agaves, etc., which have been seen to some perfection at our
shows of late, are eminently adapted for standing out in summer, and are
in fact benefited by it. Among the noblest ornaments of a good
conservatory are the Norfolk Island and other tender Araucarias; and
these may be placed out for the summer, much to their advantage, because
the rains will thoroughly clean and freshen them for winter storing. So
with some Cycads and other plants of distinct habit--the very things
best fitted to add to the attractions of the flower-garden. Thus we may,
in all but the smallest gardens, enjoy all the benefits of what is
called Subtropical Gardening, without creating any special arrangements
for it.

But what of those who have no conservatory, no hothouses, no means for
preserving large tender plants in winter? They too may enjoy the beauty
which plants of fine form afford. A better effect than any yet seen in
an English garden from tender plants may be obtained by planting hardy
ones only! There is the Pampas grass, which when well grown is
unsurpassed by anything that requires protection. There are the Yuccas,
noble and graceful in outline, and thoroughly hardy, and which, if
planted well, are not to be surpassed, if equalled, by anything of like
habit we can preserve indoors. There are the Arundos, conspicua and
Donax, things that well repay for liberal planting; and there are fine
hardy herbaceous plants like Crambe cordifolia, Rheum Emodi, Ferulas,
and various graceful umbelliferous plants that will furnish effects
equal to any we can produce by using the tenderest exotics. The
Acanthuses too, when well grown, are very suitable for this use. Then we
have a hardy Palm, that has preserved its health and greenness in
sheltered positions, where its leaves could not be torn to shreds by
storms, through all our recent hard winters.

And when we have obtained these, and many like subjects, we may
associate them with not a few things of much beauty among trees and
shrubs--with elegant tapering young pines, many of which, like Cupressus
nutkaensis and the true Thuja gigantea, have branchlets as graceful as a
Selaginella; not of necessity bringing the larger things into close or
awkward association with the humbler and dwarfer subjects, but
sufficiently so to carry the eye from the minute and pretty to the
higher and more dignified forms of vegetation. By a judicious selection
from the vast number of hardy plants now obtainable in this country, and
by associating with them, where it is convenient, house plants that may
be placed out for the summer, we may arrange and enjoy charms in the
flower-garden to which we are as yet strangers, simply because we have
not sufficiently selected from and utilized the vast amount of vegetable
beauty at our disposal.

In dealing with the tenderer subjects, we must choose such as will make
a healthy growth in sheltered places in the warmer parts of England and
Ireland at all events. There is some reason to believe that not a few of
the best will be found to flourish much further north than is generally
supposed. In all parts the kinds with permanent foliage, such as the New
Zealand flax and the hardier Dracænas, will be found as effective as
around London and Paris; and to such the northern gardener should turn
his attention as much as possible. Even if it were possible to cultivate
the softer-growing kinds, like the Ferdinandas, to the same perfection
in all parts as in the south of England, it would by no means be
everywhere desirable, and especially where expense is a consideration,
as these kinds are not capable of being used indoors in winter. The many
fine permanent-leaved subjects that stand out in summer without the
least injury, and may be transferred to the conservatory in autumn,
there to produce as fine an effect all through the cold months as they
do in the flower-garden in summer, are the best for those with limited
means.

But of infinitely greater importance are the hardy plants; for however
few can indulge in the luxury of rich displays of tender plants, or
however rare the spots in which they may be ventured out with
confidence, all may enjoy those that are hardy, and that too with
infinitely less trouble than is required by the tender ones. Those noble
masses of fine foliage displayed to us by tender plants have done much
towards correcting a false taste. What I wish to impress upon the reader
is, that in whatever part of these islands he may live, he need not
despair of producing sufficient similar effect to vary his flower-garden
or pleasure-ground beautifully by the use of hardy plants alone; and
that the noble lines of a well-grown Yucca recurva, or the finely
chiselled yet fern-like spray of a graceful young conifer, will aid him
as much in this direction as anything that requires either tropical or
subtropical temperature.

Since writing the preceding remarks I have visited America, and when on
my way home landed at Queenstown with a view of seeing a few places in
the south of Ireland, and among others Fota Island, the residence of Mr.
Smith Barry, where I found a capital illustration of what may be easily
effected with hardy plants alone. Here an island is planted with a hardy
bamboo (_Bambusa falcata_), which thrives so freely as to form great
tufts from 16 ft. to 20 ft. high. The result is that the scene reminds
one of a bit of the vegetation of the uplands of Java, or that of the
bamboo country in China. The thermometer fell last December (1870)
seventeen degrees below freezing point, so that they suffered somewhat,
but their general effect was not much marred. Accompanying these, and
also on the margins of the water, were huge masses of Pampas grass yet
in their beauty of bloom, and many great tufts of the tropical-looking
New Zealand flax, with here and there a group of Yuccas. The vegetation
of the islands and of the margins of the water was composed almost
solely of these, and the effect quite unlike anything usually seen in
the open air in this country. Nothing in such arrangements as those at
Battersea Park equals it, because all the subjects were quite hardy, and
as much at home as if in their native wilds. Remember, in addition, that
no trouble was required after they were planted, and that the beauty of
the scene was very striking a few days before Christmas, long after the
ornaments of the ordinary flower-garden had perished. The whole
neighbourhood of the island was quite tropical in aspect; and, as behind
the silvery plumes of the Pampas grass and the slender wands of the
bamboo the exquisitely graceful heads of the Monterey and other
cypresses and various pines towered high in the air, it was one of the
most charming scenes I have yet enjoyed in the pleasure-grounds of the
British Isles. And this, which was simply the result of judiciously
planting three or four kinds of hardy plants, will serve to suggest how
many other beautiful aspects of vegetation we may create by utilising
the rich stores within our reach.

[Illustration: Clumsy mass of Cannas in a London park.]

We will next speak of arrangement and sundry other matters of some
importance in connection with this subject. The radical fault of the
“Subtropical Garden,” as hitherto seen, is its lumpish monotony and the
almost total neglect of graceful combinations. It is fully shown in the
London parks every year, so that many people will have seen it for
themselves. The subjects are not used to contrast with or relieve others
of less attractive port and brilliant colour, but are generally set down
in large masses. Here you meet a troop of Cannas, numbering 500, in one
long formal bed--next you arrive at a circle of Aralias, or an oval of
Ficus, in which a couple of hundred plants are so densely packed that
their tops form a dead level. Isolated from everything else as a rule
these masses fail to throw any natural grace into the garden, but, on
the other hand, go a long way towards spoiling the character of the
subjects of which they are composed. For it is manifest that you get a
far superior effect from a group of such a plant as the Gunnera, the
Polymnia, or the Castor-oil plant, properly associated with other
subjects of entirely diverse character, than you can when the lines or
masses of such as these become so large and so estranged from their
surroundings that there is no relieving point within reach of the eye. A
single specimen or small group of a fine Canna forms one of the most
graceful objects the eye can see. Plant a rood of it, and it soon
becomes as attractive as so much maize or wheat. No doubt an occasional
mass of Cannas, etc., might prove effective--in a distant prospect
especially--but the thing is repeated _ad nauseam_.

The fact is, we do not want purely “Subtropical gardens,” or “Leaf
gardens,” or “Colour gardens,” but such gardens as, by happy
combinations of the materials at our disposal, shall go far to satisfy
those in whom true taste has been awakened--and, indeed, all classes.
For it is quite a mistake to assume that because people, ignorant of the
inexhaustible stores of the vegetable kingdom, admire the showy glares
of colour now so often seen in our gardens, they are incapable of
enjoying scenes displaying some traces of natural beauty and variety.

The fine-leaved plants have not yet been associated immediately with the
flowers; hence the chief fault. Till they are so treated we can hardly
see the great use of such in ornamental gardening. Why not take some of
the handsomest plants of the medium-sized kinds, place them in the
centre of a bed, and then surround them with the gaily-flowering
subjects? The Castor-oil plants would not do so well for this, because
they are rampant growers in fair seasons, but the Yuccas, Cannas,
Wigandias, and small neat Palms and Cycads would suit exactly. Avoid
huge, unmeaning masses, and associate more intimately the fine-leaved
plants with the brilliant flowers. A quiet mass of green might be
desirable in some positions, but even that could be varied most
effectively as regards form. The combinations of this kind that may be
made are innumerable, and there is no reason why our beds should not be
as graceful as bouquets well and simply made.

However, it is not only by making combinations of the subtropical plants
with the gay-flowering ones now seen in our flower-gardens that a
beautiful effect may be obtained, but also with those of a somewhat
different type. Take, for instance, the stately hollyhock, sometimes
grown in such formal plantations as to lose some of its charms, and
usually stiff and poor below the flowers. It is easy to imagine how much
better a group of these would appear if seen surrounded by a graceful
ring of Cannas, or any other tall and vigorous subjects, than they have
ever yet appeared in our gardens.

Consider, again, the Lilies, from the superb, tall, and double varieties
of the brilliant Tiger lily to the fair White lily or the popular L.
auratum. Why, a few isolated heads of Fortune’s Tiger lily, rising like
candelabra above a group of Cannas, would form one of the most brilliant
pictures ever seen in a garden. Then, to descend from a very tall to a
very dwarf lily, the large and white trumpet-like flowers of L.
longiflorum would look superb, emerging from the outer margin of a mass
of

[Illustration: Anemone japonica alba. Type of fine-flowered herbaceous
plant for associating with foliage-plants.]

subtropical plants, relieved by the rich green within; and anybody, with
even a slight knowledge of the lily family, may imagine many other
combinations equally beautiful and new. The bulbs would of course
require planting in the autumn, and might be left in their places for
several years at a time, whereas the subtropical plants might be those
that require planting every year; but as the effect is obtained by using
comparatively few lilies, the spaces between them would be so large, as
to leave plenty of room to plant the others. However, it is worth
bearing in mind, that most of the Cannas, by far the finest group of
“Subtropical” plants for the British Isles, remain through the winter in
beds in the open air protected by litter: hence, permanent combinations
of Lilies and Cannas are perfectly practicable.

Then, again, we have those brilliant and graceful hosts of Gladioli,
that do not show their full beauty in the florist’s stand or in his
formal bed, but when they spring here and there, in an isolated manner,
from rich foliage, entirely unlike their own pointed sword-like blades.
Next may be named the flame-flowered Tritoma, itself almost subtropical
in foliage when well grown. Any of the Tritomas furnish a splendid
effect grouped near or closely associated with subtropical plants. The
lavishly blooming and tropical-looking Dahlia is a host in itself,
varying so much as it does from the most gorgeous to the most delicate
hues, and differing greatly too in the size of the flowers, from those
of the pretty fancy Dahlias to the largest exhibition kinds.
Combinations of Dahlias with Cannas and other free-growing subtropical
plants have a most satisfactory effect; and where beds or groups are
formed of hardy subjects (Acanthuses and the like), in quiet half-shady
spots, some of the more beautiful spotted and white varieties of our own
stately and graceful Foxglove would be charmingly effective. In similar
positions a great Mullein (_Verbascum_) here and there would also suit;
while such bold herbaceous genera as Iris, Aster (the tall perennial
kinds), the perennial Lupin, Baptisias, Thermopsis, Delphiniums, tall
Veronicas, Aconites, tall Campanulas, Papaver bracteatum, Achillea
filipendula, Eupatoriums, tall Phloxes, Vernonias, Leptandra, etc.,
might be used effectively in various positions, associated with groups
of hardy subjects. For those put out in early summer, summer and
autumn-flowering things should be chosen.

The tall and graceful Sparaxis pulcherrima would look exquisite leaning
forth from masses of rich foliage about a yard high; the common and the
double perennial Sunflower (_Helianthus multiflorus, fl. pl._) would
serve in rougher parts, where admired; in sheltered dells the large and
hardy varieties of Crinum capense would look very tropical and beautiful
if planted in rich moist ground; and the Fuchsia would afford very
efficient aid in mild districts, where it is little injured in winter,
and where, consequently, tall specimens flower throughout the summer
months; and lastly, the many varied and magnificent varieties of
herbaceous Peony, raised during recent years, would prove admirable as
isolated specimens on the grass near groups of fine-foliaged plants.
Then again we have the fine Japan Anemones, white and rose, the showy
and vigorous Rudbeckias, the sweet and large annual Datura ceratocaula,
the profusely-flowering Statice latifolia, the Gaillardias, the Peas
(everlasting and otherwise), the ever-welcome African Lily (_Calla_),
the handsome Loosestrife (_Lythrum roseum superbum_), and the still
handsomer French Willow, and not a few other things which need not be
enumerated here, inasmuch as it is hoped enough has been said to show
our great and unused resources for adding real grace and interest to our
gardens. This phase of the subject--the association of tall or bold
flowers with foliage-plants--is so important, that I have bestowed some
pains in selecting the many and various subjects useful for it from
almost every class of plants; and they will be found in a list at the
end of the alphabetical arrangement.

Many charming results may be obtained by carpeting the ground beneath
masses of tender subtropical plants with quick-growing ornamental
annuals and bedding plants, which will bloom before the larger subjects
have put forth their strength and beauty of leaf. If all interested in
flower-gardening had an opportunity of seeing the charming effects
produced by judiciously intermingling fine-leaved plants with brilliant
flowers, there would be an immediate revolution in our flower-gardening,
and verdant grace and beauty of form would be introduced, and all the
brilliancy of colour that could be desired might be seen at the same
time. Here is a bed of Erythrinas not yet in flower: but what affords
that brilliant and singular mass of colour beneath them? Simply a
mixture of the lighter varieties of Lobelia speciosa with variously
coloured and brilliant Portulacas. The beautiful surfacings that may
thus be made with annual, biennial, or ordinary bedding plants, from
Mignonette to Petunias and Nierembergias, are almost innumerable.

Reflect for a moment how consistent is all this with the best gardening
and the purest taste. The bare earth is covered quickly with these
free-growing dwarfs; there is an immediate and a charming contrast
between the dwarf-flowering and the fine-foliaged plants; and should the
last at any time put their heads too high for the more valuable things
above them, they can be cut in for a second bloom. In the case of using
foliage-plants that are eventually to cover the bed completely, annuals
may be sown, and they in many cases will pass out of bloom and may be
cleared away just as the large leaves begin to cover the ground. Where
this is not the case, but the larger plants are placed thin enough to
always allow of the lower ones being seen, two or even more kinds of
dwarf plants may be employed, so that the one may succeed the other, and
that there may be a mingling of bloom. It may be thought that this kind
of mixture would interfere with what is called the unity of effect that
we attempt to attain in our flower-gardens. This need not be so by any
means; the system could be used effectively in the most formal of
gardens.

One of the most useful and natural ways of diversifying a garden, and
one that we rarely or never take advantage of, consists in placing
really distinct and handsome plants alone upon the grass, to break the
monotony of clump margins and of everything else. To follow this plan is
_necessary_ wherever great variety and the highest beauty are desired in
the ornamental garden. Plants may be

[Illustration: Group and single specimens of plants isolated on the
grass.]

placed singly or in open groups near the margins of a bold clump of
shrubs or in the open grass; and the system is applicable to all kinds
of hardy ornamental subjects, from trees downwards, though in our case
the want is for the fine-leaved plants and the more distinct hardy
subjects. Nothing, for instance, can look better than a well-developed
tuft of the broad-leaved Acanthus latifolius, springing from the turf
not far from the margin of a pleasure-ground walk; and the same is true
of the Yuccas, Tritomas, and other things of like character and
hardiness. We may make attractive groups of one family, as the hardiest
Yuccas; or splendid groups of one species like the Pampas grass--not by
any means repeating the individual, for there are about twenty varieties
of this plant known on the Continent, and from these half a dozen really
distinct and charming kinds might be selected to form a group. The same
applies to the Tritomas, which we usually manage to drill into straight
lines; in an isolated group in a verdant glade they are seen for the
first time to best advantage: and what might not be done with these and
the like by making mixed groups, or letting each plant stand distinct
upon the grass, perfectly isolated in its beauty!

Let us again try to illustrate the idea simply. Take an important spot
in a pleasure-ground--a sweep of grass in face of a shrubbery--and see
what can be done with it by means of these isolated plants. If, instead
of leaving it in the bald state in which it is often found, we place
distinct things isolated here and there upon the grass, the margin of
shrubbery will be quite softened, and a new and charming feature added
to the garden. If one who knew many plants were arranging them in this
way, and had a large stock to select from, he might produce numberless
fine effects. In the case of the smaller things, such as the Yucca and
variegated Arundo, groups of four or five good plants should be used to
form one mass, and everything should be perfectly distinct and isolated,
so that a person could freely move about amongst the plants without
touching them. In addition to such arrangements, two or three
individuals of a species might be placed here and there upon the grass
with the best effect. For example, there is at present in our nurseries
a great Japanese Polygonum (_P. Sieboldi_), which has never as yet been
used with much effect in the garden. If anybody will select some open
grassy spot in a pleasure-garden, or grassy glade near a wood--some spot
considered unworthy of attention as regards ornamenting it--and plant a
group of three plants of this Polygonum, leaving fifteen feet or so
between the stools, a distinct aspect of vegetation will be the result.
The plant is herbaceous, and will spring up every year to a height of
from six feet to eight feet if planted well; it has a graceful arching
habit in the upper branches, and is covered with a profusion of small
bunches of pale flowers in autumn. It is needless to multiply examples;
the plan is capable of infinite variation, and on that account alone
should be welcome to all true gardeners.

[Illustration: Portion of plan showing Yuccas, Pampas grass, Tritomas,
Retinospora, Acanthus latifolius, Arundo Donax variegata, etc.,
irregularly isolated on the grass.]

One kind of arrangement needs to be particularly guarded against--the
geometro-picturesque one, seen in some parts of the London parks devoted
to subtropical gardening. The plants are very often of the finest kinds
and in the most robust health, all the materials for the best results
are abundant, and yet the scene fails to satisfy the eye, from the
needless formality of many of the beds, produced by the heaping together
of a great number of species of one kind in long straight or twisting
masses with high raised edges frequently of hard-beaten soil. Many
people will not see their way to obliterate the formality of the beds,
but assuredly we need not do so to get rid of such effective formality
as that shown in the accompanying figure!

[Illustration: Formal arrangements in London parks.]

The formality of the true geometrical garden is charming to many to whom
this style is offensive; and there is not the slightest reason why the
most beautiful combinations of fine-leaved and fine-flowered plants
should not be made in any kind of geometrical garden.

But in the purely picturesque garden it is as needless, as it is in
false taste, to follow the course here pointed out. Hardy plants may be
isolated on the turf, and may be arranged in beautiful irregular groups,
with the turf also for a carpet, or some graceful spray of hardy
trailing plants. Beds may be readily placed so that no such
objectionable stage-like results will be seen as those shown in the
preceding figure: tender plants may be grouped as freely as may be
desired--a formal edge avoided by the turf being allowed to play
irregularly under and along the margins, while the remaining bare ground
beneath the tall plants may be quickly covered with some fast-growing
annuals like Mignonette or Nolanas, some soft-spreading bedding plants
like Lobelias or Petunias, or subjects still more peculiarly suited for
this purpose, such as the common Lycopodium denticulatum and
Tradescantia discolor. Choice tender specimens of Tree ferns, etc.,
placed in dark shady dells, may be plunged to the rims of the pots in
the turf or earth, and some graceful or bold trailing herb placed round
the cavity so as to conceal it; and in this way such results may be
attained as those indicated in the first plate, in those showing the
Dimorphanthus, Musa Ensete, and in the frontispiece. The day will come
when we shall be as anxious to avoid all formal twirlings in our
gardens as we now are to have them perpetrated in them by
landscape-gardeners of great repute for applying wall-paper or
fire-shovel patterns to the surface of the reluctant earth, and when we
shall no more think of tolerating in a garden such a scene as that shown
in the preceding figure, than a landscape artist would tolerate it in a
picture.

The old landscape-gardening dogma, which tells us we cannot have all the
wild beauty of nature in our gardens, and may as well resign ourselves
to the compass, and the level, and the defined daub of colour and
pudding-like heaps of shrubs, had some faint force when our materials
for gardening were few,[A] but considering our present rich and, to a
great extent, unused stores from every clime, and from almost every
important section of the vegetable kingdom, it is demonstrably false and
foolish.

[A] “In gardening, the materials of the scene are few, and those few
unwieldy, and the artist must often content himself with the reflection
that he has given the best disposition in his power to the scanty and
intractable materials of nature.”--ALLISON.

To these observations on arrangement, etc., one good rule may be
added:--Make your garden as distinct as possible from those of your

[Illustration: Shady and sheltered Dell, with Tree Ferns and other Stove
Plants placed out for the summer.]

neighbours--which by no means necessitates a departure from the rules of
good taste.

I wish particularly to call attention to the fine effects which may be
secured, from the simplest and most easily obtained materials, by using
some of our hardy trees and shrubs in the subtropical garden. Our object
generally is to secure large and handsome types of leaves; and for this
purpose we usually place in the open air young plants of exotic trees,
taking them in again in autumn; and, perhaps, as we never see them but
in a diminutive state, we often forget that, when branched into a large
head in their native countries, they are not a whit more remarkable in
foliage than many of the trees of our pleasure-grounds. Thus, if the
well-known Paulownia imperialis were too tender to stand our winters,
and if we were accustomed to see it only in a young and simple-stemmed
condition and with large leaves, we should doubtless plant it out every
summer as we do the Ferdinanda. There is no occasion whatever to resort
to exotic subjects, while we can so easily obtain fine hardy
subjects--which, moreover, may be grown by everybody and everywhere. By
annually cutting down young plants of various hardy trees and shrubs,
and letting them make a clean, simple-stemmed growth every year, we
will, as a rule, obtain finer effects than can be got from tender ones.
The Ailantus, for example, treated in this way, gives us as fine a type
of pinnate leaf as can be desired. Nobody need place Astrapæa Wallichii
in the open air, as I have seen done, so long as a simple-stemmed young
plant of the Paulownia makes such a column of magnificent leaves. The
delicately-cut leaves of the Gleditschias, borne on strong young stems,
would be as pretty as those of any fern; and so in the case of various
other hardy trees and shrubs. Persons in the coldest and least
favourable parts of the country need not doubt of being able to obtain
as fine types of foliage as they can desire, by selecting a dozen kinds
of hardy trees and treating them in this way. What may be done in this
way, in one case, is shown in the accompanying plate, representing a
young plant of Ailantus, with its current year’s shoot and leaves,
standing gracefully in the midst of a bed of Cannas.

A few words may now be added about some types of vegetation which,
though not included among what are commonly termed subtropical plants,
may yet be judiciously used in combination with them, and go far to
produce very charming effects.

[Illustration: AILANTUS AND CANNAS

Suggesting the effects to be obtained from young and vigorous specimens
of hardy fine-leaved trees.]

Among conifers we find many subjects of the most exquisite grace, and of
a beautiful free and pointed habit, which it is most desirable we should
have associated with vegetation more distinguished for brilliancy than
grace. They are in many cases as elegantly chiselled and dissected as
the finest fern, and it is difficult to find more beautiful masses of
verdure than such plants as Retinospora plumosa and R. obtusa display
when well developed; they are simply invaluable for those who use them
with taste. Apart altogether from our want of a more elegantly
diversified surface in the flower-garden--the best and most practical
way to meet which is by the use of such plants as these and neat and
elegant young specimens of such things as Thujopsis borealis--there is,
in many British gardens, a great gulf between the larger tree and shrub
vegetation and the humbler colouring material, which most will admit
should be filled up, and there is nothing more suitable for it than the
many graceful conifers we now possess. Much as conifers are grown with
us, how few people have any idea of their great value as ornamental
plants for the very choicest position in a garden! We are sometimes too
apt to put them in what is called their “proper place,”--or, at all
events, too far from the seat of interest to thoroughly enjoy them in
winter, when the beauty of their form and their exquisite verdure are
best seen. If the dwarfer and choicer conifers were tastefully disposed
in and immediately around a flower-garden not altogether spoiled by a
profusion of beds for masses of colour, that flower-garden could hardly
fail to look as well in winter as in summer; in fact I have seen places
where, from rather close association of the more elegant types, the best
kind of winter garden was made. Our efforts must tend to prevent a
desert-like aspect at any time of the year; and to this end nothing can
help us more than a judicious selection of conifers. Almost every beauty
of form is theirs. They possess a permanent dignity and interest, always
occupying the ground and embellishing it, displaying distinct tints of
ever-grateful green in spring and summer, waving majestically before the
gusts of autumn, and beautiful when bearing on their deepest green the
snows of winter. Some of the more suitable kinds are named in a list at
the end of this book, but the graceful pines are so commonly grown that
few will have any difficulty in securing proper sorts.

The Gourd tribe is capable, if properly used, of adding much remarkable
beauty and character to

[Illustration: Young Conifers and hardy fine-leaved Plants.]

the garden; yet, as a rule, it is seldom used. There is no natural order
more wonderful in the variety and singular shapes of its fruit than that
to which the melon, cucumber, and vegetable marrow belong. From the
writhing Snake-cucumber, which hangs down four or five feet long from
its stem, to the round enormous giant pumpkin or gourd, the grotesque
variation, both in colour and shape and size, is marvellous. There are
some pretty little gourds which do not weigh more than half an ounce
when ripe; while, on the other hand, there are kinds with fruit almost
large enough to make a sponge bath. Eggs, bottles, gooseberries, clubs,
caskets, folded umbrellas, balls, vases, urns, small balloons,--all have
their likenesses in the gourd family. Those who have seen a good
collection of them will be able to understand Nathaniel Hawthorne’s
enthusiasm about these quaint and graceful vegetable forms when he says:
“A hundred gourds in my garden were worthy, in my eyes at least, of
being rendered indestructible in marble. If ever Providence (but I know
it never will) should assign me a superfluity of gold, part of it shall
be expended for a service of plate, or most delicate porcelain, to be
wrought into the shape of gourds gathered from vines which I will plant
with my own hands. As dishes for containing vegetables they would be
peculiarly appropriate. Gazing at them, I felt that by my agency
something worth living for had been done. A new substance was born into
the world. They were real and tangible existences, which the mind could
seize hold of and rejoice in.” Of course the climate of New England is
much better suited for fully developing the gourd tribe than ours, but
it is satisfactory to know that they may be readily and beautifully
grown in this country.

[Illustration: Gourds]

There are many positions in gardens in which they might be grown with
great advantage; on low trellises, depending from the edges of raised
beds, the smaller and medium-sized kinds trained over arches or arched
trellis-work, covering banks, or on the ordinary level earth of the
garden. Isolated, too, some kinds would look very effective, and in fact
there is hardly any limit to the uses to which they might be applied. In
the Royal Botanic Gardens at Dublin, there is a singular wigwam made by
placing a number of dead branches so as to form the framework, and then
planting Aristolochia Sipho all round these. It runs over them, and the
large leaves make a perfect summer roof. A similar tent might be made
with the free-growing gourds, and it would have the additional merit of
suspending some of the most singular, graceful, and gigantic of all
known fruits from the roof. A few words on their culture, and a
selection of kinds, occur at the end of the book.

Although some Ferns are named in the descriptive part of this book, it
is desirable to allude to the family here. Why do we always put ferns in
the shade, when many of the best and hardiest kinds grow freely in the
full sun if sufficiently moist at the root? Why do we always confine
them to the fernery proper, when there are so many other places that
could be graced by their presence? The very highest beauty of form might
be added to beds of low flowers, by the introduction of such ferns as
the Struthiopteris, Pteris, Lastrea, etc., while they should also be
freely planted in various parts of the pleasure-ground, either alone, or
grouped with the Acanthuses and other hardy fine-leaved plants. Not a
few of the Umbelliferous plants recommended have foliage as finely cut
as any of the Ferns, and would associate very well with them. Even in
cases where the soil might not be suitable for ferns, it would, instead
of confining them to the fernery proper, be much better to arrange for
having small groups or beds of them in places alongside of shady
wood-walks or similar positions. By reference to the Osmunda article, it
will be seen how these have been grown to magnificent proportions. It
may be easily imagined that groups of fine ferns, grown to the
luxuriance there described, would contrast with and relieve groups of
the brilliant flowers in a superb way.

As the culture of most of the subjects has been sufficiently spoken of
in the descriptive part, it is needless to say much of it here, but a
few general remarks may help to make the matter clearer to the amateur.
It is hoped that the greater number of the hardy subjects enumerated
will sufficiently prove that it is not only those persons who have
streets of glass-houses to whom the luxury of “subtropical gardening” is
accessible. Once placed in suitable soil and position, these hardy kinds
may, as a rule, be left to take care of themselves.

A great number of subjects, like the Ricinus and the Annuals, may be
considered practically hardy, inasmuch as they only require to be raised
in warm or cool frames, or even (some of them) in the open air. When
once planted out for the summer, they give but little further trouble.

In the next group may be placed the tender greenhouse kinds; long-lived
subjects, like the Dracænas, American Aloe, etc., which thrive in
greenhouses or conservatories in winter, and are great ornaments there,
and which may be placed in the open air in summer without the least
injury. Next to the hardy group, this is the most important, from the
fact that the subjects are effective at all seasons of the year, and
useful indoors as well as without. They also, unlike the following, may
be enjoyed by every one who possesses any kind of a cool glazed
structure; and even, in some cases, this is not needed, for I have seen
some very fine specimens of Agave americana kept in a large entrance
hall in winter, and put out of doors in May to be taken in again in
October.

Lastly, we have the least important group of all, and happily also the
most costly, viz., those plants which must be kept through the winter
and spring in warm stoves, such as Ferdinanda, Solanum, etc. Considering
the vast number of hardy and half-hardy plants from which we may
select, this type is not worthy of encouragement in gardens generally,
with the exception of a few fine things, such as Polymnia grandis. They
may, for the sake of convenience, be considered in two sections: those,
like the Polymnia, that should be put out in a young state, and which
make a fresh and handsome growth during the summer months; and those
which, like the Monstera and Anthurium acaule, make no growth whatever
during that season. It need not be said that the first section is by far
the most important: it comprises the Wigandia, and some of the noblest
things used in this way. Plants of the other section can, in the nature
of things, be tried in but few places in this country; they are too
expensive, and they are not the most effective: but some persons no
doubt may take a pleasure in showing what will endure the open air, even
if useless for any other purpose. One general rule may be applied to
these last-named subjects--they should be allowed to make a strong
growth in the hothouse in spring or early summer, and to mature, and, so
to speak, harden off that growth before being placed in the open air
early in June, or even later if the season be unfavourable.

Speaking generally of all the tender subjects used, it is necessary to
discriminate between kinds that should be planted out in a young state
every year, and those which are valuable in proportion to their age and
size. Some plants are all the better the higher and larger they are
grown; others must be started in a dwarf fresh state every year, or, if
not, their foliage will not possess that pristine freshness which charms
us when they are properly treated. A large plant of Polymnia grandis,
for example, would, if placed in the open air in early summer, speedily
become a far from attractive object, while a young plant of the same
kind, put out on the same day, would soon produce and carry to the end
of the season a mass of fresh and noble leaves. But of course this only
applies to kinds that grow rapidly during the summer months in our
climate.

With respect to the preparation of the beds for the finer subtropical
plants, a peculiar mode is practised in Battersea Park. Here many of the
beds are raised above the level of the ground, and underneath and around
the mass of light rich soil is a good layer of brick-rubbish, as shown
in the accompanying engraving. The soil is first excavated and thrown
round the margin of the bed; then the brick-rubbish is put in on the
bottom and

[Illustration: Section of raised bed at Battersea, with brick-rubbish
beneath and around the soil.]

around the sides also, raising the bed somewhat above the level of the
ground; the cavity in the centre is then filled up, generally with fine
light rich soil, using as much of the soil that was dug out as is fit to
be used, and arranging the remainder round the edge of the raised bed,
covering it neatly with turf. The soil may vary in depth from three feet
to eighteen inches, according to the kinds of plants to be grown in it.
In this way, by presenting a larger surface to the sun, it is considered
that a greater amount of heat is obtained; but I certainly think the
advantages of the method are not so great in this way as is generally
supposed, and that it is quite needless to adopt it in the case of the
great majority of subjects. Its chief merit probably is that it secures
a better drainage. Good drainage is undoubtedly indispensable, and,
still more so, a thoroughly rich and light mass of deep soil, with
abundance of water; without these two last conditions it is hopeless to
expect a free rich growth, which is the great charm of these plants.
Ricinus, Cannas, Ferdinanda, and some of the freer-growing kinds
certainly succeed perfectly without any such arrangement as that above
described. The more delicate kinds, such as the Solanums and Wigandia
macrophylla, would be those most likely to be benefited by it. It is
needless to say, that the numerous fine and hardy subjects enumerated in
Part II. do not require anything of the kind, although they too will, as
a rule, be fine in proportion to the care bestowed in securing for them
a deep and rich body of soil.

One most essential matter is the securing of as perfect shelter as is
possible. Warm, sunny, and thoroughly sheltered dells should be chosen
where convenient; and, in any case, positions which are sheltered should
be selected, as the leaves of all the better kinds suffer very much from
strong winds, from which they will be protected if judiciously planted
near sheltering banks and trees. Even in quite level districts it will
be possible to secure shelter, by planting trees of various kinds, among
which such graceful conifers as Thujopsis borealis, Thuja gigantea
(true), Cupressus macrocarpa, Cryptomeria elegans, etc., should be
freely used in the foreground, as in beauty of form they are unsurpassed
by any short-lived inhabitants of the summer garden. Except, however, in
the case of the Tree-ferns, and various other things not grown in the
open air but simply placed there for the summer, it is very desirable
not to place the plants in the shade of trees. All the things which have
to _grow_ in the open air should be placed in the full sun. Not a few
hardy subjects will thrive very well without any but ordinary shelter,
as, for example, the Yuccas and Acanthuses; but, judging by the
remarkable way in which the hardy Bamboo thrives when placed in a
sheltered dell, shelter has a considerable influence on the well-being
even of these, as it must have on all subjects with large leaf-surfaces.
But it should not be forgotten that shelter may be well secured without
placing the beds or groups so near trees that they will be robbed,
shaded, or otherwise injured by them.

W. R.

_March 1, 1871._




PART II.

DESCRIPTION, ARRANGEMENT, CULTURE, ETC., OF SUITABLE SPECIES, HARDY AND
TENDER, ALPHABETICALLY ARRANGED.




SUBTROPICAL GARDENING.

PART II.


[*]=Acacia Julibrissin.=--A native of Persia, with large and elegant
much-divided leaves, and flowers somewhat like short tinted brushes from
the numerous purple stamens. Though this does not succeed as a standard
tree in all parts of England (where it grows well against walls, and
sometimes flowers), yet doubtless it would do so in some parts of the
south, and I have seen it make presentable standards about Geneva and in
Anjou. But for our purposes it is better that it should not be perfectly
hardy, as by confining it to a single young stem and using young plants,
or plants that have been cut down every year, we shall get an erect stem
covered with leaves more graceful than a fern, and that is the kind of
ornament we want as a graceful object amidst low-growing flowers. The
leaves, like those of some other plants of the pea tribe, are slightly
sensitive. On fine sunny days they spread out fully and afford a
pleasant shade; on dull ones the leaflets fall down. This interesting
phenomenon takes place with other members of the same family--for
instance, the elegant _A. dealbata_ of our conservatories. Seed of _A.
Julibrissin_--or the silk-rose, as it is called by the Persians in
consequence of its silky stamens--is readily obtained, and it is much
better raised from seed, as then you get those single-stemmed and
vigorous young plants which are to the flower-garden what an elegant
fern is to the conservatory or show-house. To succeed with it in the way
above named, it may be protected at the root and cut down every year in
spring, or strong young plants may be put out annually, in much the same
way as those of _A. lophantha_.

[*] _The names of all hardy species and other kinds easily raised from
seed in spring (the kinds useful in all classes of garden), are preceded
by an asterisk._

=Acacia lophantha.=--This elegant plant, though not hardy, is one of
those which all may enjoy, from the freedom with which it grows in the
open air in summer. It will prove more useful for the flower-garden than
it has ever been for the houses, and, being easily raised, is entitled
to a place here among the very best. The elegance of its leaves and its
quick growth in the open air make it quite a boon to the flower-gardener
who wishes to establish graceful verdure amongst the brighter ornaments
of his parterre. It has graceful fern-like leaves and a close and erect
habit, which permits us to closely associate it with flowering plants
without in the least shading them or robbing them. Of course I speak of
it in the young and single-stemmed condition, the way in which it should
be used. By confining it to a single stem and using it in a young state,
you get the fullest size and grace of which the leaves are capable.
Allow it to become old and branched, and it may be useful, but by no
means so much so as when young and without side branches. It may be
raised from seed as easily as a common bedding plant. By sowing it
early

[Illustration: ACANTHUS LATIFOLIUS (_lusitanicus_).

Ornamental foliaged herbaceous Section; retaining its leaves till very
late in the year.]

in the year it may be had fit for use by the first of June; but plants a
year old or so, stiff, strong, and well hardened off for planting out at
the end of May, are the best. It would be desirable to raise an annual
stock, as it is almost as useful for room-decoration as for the garden.
Native of New Holland.


ACANTHUS.

These stout and hardy herbaceous plants are of the greatest importance
in the subtropical garden or the pleasure-ground, their effect being
very good when they are well established. They thrive in almost any
soil, but attain their greatest luxuriance and beauty in deep warm ones.
The best uses for these species are as isolated tufts in the grass, in
the mixed border, or in picturesque groups with other hardy subjects. In
all cases they should be placed in positions where they are not likely
to be disturbed, as their beauty is not seen until they are well
established. All are easily propagated by division. Few herbaceous
genera may be made more useful than this.

=*Acanthus hirsutus.=--This uncommon species has a narrow spiny leaf,
more in the way of _Morina longifolia_ than the ordinary Acanthuses, and
is dark green in hue. The leaves grow to a length of about 15 ins. or 16
ins. in ordinary soil. Being distinct, it may be worth growing, though
in point of character or importance it is inferior to the larger kinds.
South of Europe.

=*Acanthus latifolius.=--The leaves of this are bold and noble in
outline, and the plant has a tendency, rare in some hardy things with
otherwise fine qualities, to retain them till the end of the season
without losing a particle of their freshness and polished verdure. In
fact, the only thing we have to decide about this subject is, what is
the best place for it? Now, it is one of those things that will not
disgrace any position, and will prove equally at home in the centre of
the mixed border, projected in the grass a little from the edge of a
choice shrubbery, or in the flower-garden; nobody need fear its
displaying anything like the seediness which such things as the
Heracleums show at the end of summer. I should not like to advise its
being planted in the centre of a flower-bed, or in any other position
where it would be disturbed; but in case it were determined to plant
permanent groups of fine-leaved hardy plants, then indeed it could be
used with great success. Supposing we have an irregular kind of
flower-garden or pleasure-ground to deal with (a common case), one of
the best things to do with this Acanthus is to plant it in the grass, at
some distance from the clumps, and perhaps near a few other things of
like character. It is better than any kind of Acanthus hitherto commonly
cultivated, though one or two of these are fine. Give it deep good soil,
and do not grudge it this attention, because, unlike tender plants, it
will not trouble you again for a long time. Nobody seems to know from
whence it came. Probably it is a variety of _Acanthus mollis_. The plant
varies a good deal; I have seen specimens of it about a foot high, with
leaves comparatively small and stiff and rigid, as if cast in a mould,
by the side of others of thrice that development, and of the usual
texture.

=*Acanthus longifolius.=--A fine, distinct, and new species from
Dalmatia and S. Europe, 3½ ft. to 4 ft. high, distinguished from _A.
mollis_ (to which it is allied) by the length and narrowness of its
arching leaves. They are about 2½ ft. long, very numerous, of a bright
green colour, growing at first erect, then inclining and forming a
sheaf-like tuft, which has a very fine effect. The flowers are of a
wine-red colour, becoming lighter before they fall. A specimen in the
gardens of the Museum at Paris, in four years after planting, had
twenty-five blooming-stems rising from the midst of a round mass of
verdure nearly 2½ ft. in height and width. This would be very effective
on the undulating and picturesque parts of landscape-gardens. It does
not run so much at the root as _A. mollis_. It seeds more freely than
the other kinds, and may be readily increased by seeds as well as by
division. Its free-flowering quality makes this species peculiarly
valuable, while it is as good as any for isolation or grouping.

=*Acanthus mollis.=--A well-known old border-plant from the south of
Europe, about 3 ft. high, with leaves nearly 2 ft. long by 1 ft. broad,
heart-shaped in outline, and cut into angular toothed lobes. The flowers
are white or lilac, the inflorescence forming a remarkable-looking
spike, half the length of the stem. Well adapted for borders, isolation,
margins of shrubberies, and semi-wild places, in deep ordinary soil, the
richer the better. Increased by division of the roots in winter or early
spring.

=*Acanthus spinosissimus.=--This is in all respects among the finest of
thoroughly hardy “foliage-plants,” growing to a height of 3½ ft., and
bearing rosy-flesh-coloured flowers in spikes of a foot or more in
length. It is perfectly hardy, very free in growth, and is quite
distinct from any of the other species, forming roundish masses of
dark-green leaves, with rather a profusion of glistening spines, by
which it is known immediately from its relatives. As a permanent object,
fit to plant in a nook in the pleasure-ground or on the grass,
associated with the nobler grasses or other plants, there is nothing to
surpass it. I know of no hardy foliage-plant so thoroughly neat in its
habit at all times. It does not often flower; and if it should throw up
a spike, it will perhaps be no loss to cut it off, as its leaves are its
best ornament, though the flowers too are interesting. Never at any time
does it require the least attention; it will stand any exposure; and is,
in a word, invaluable as a hardy ornamental plant. It will thrive best
in good and deep soil. South of Europe.

=*Acanthus spinosus.=--This species appears to flower well more
regularly than any other. Its leaves are rather narrow, and very deeply
divided into almost triangular segments: they are also covered with
short spines. The flowering-stems are about 3 ft. high, and bear dense
spikes of purplish flowers. Useful for borders, or grouping with the
other kinds and plants of similar character and size. South of Europe.

=*Adiantum pedatum.=--This fern, which abounds in the woods of Canada
and the United States, is unquestionably one of the most elegant of
those which are able to endure the climate of Britain, and grows from 16
ins. to 20 ins. high. From the tops of the erect black stems the fronds
branch and spread horizontally in a very graceful and peculiar manner.
The leaflets are slightly wedge-shaped, the upper margin resembling an
arc of a circle. The American Maiden-hair flourishes in a light cool
soil, and in a half-shaded position, or in a coarsely-broken, shallow,
turfy peat soil, covered with a layer of moss to keep it constantly
cool. It is commonly grown in the greenhouse with us, but is especially
adapted for embellishing the low and shady parts of rockwork, and for
ornamenting beds and mounds of peaty soil which have a north aspect or
are sheltered from the full sun. It is propagated by division of the
tufts in autumn or early spring. If done in autumn, the divisions should
be potted and placed under a frame for the winter, as they form new
roots more readily if so treated. There can be no question that, if
planted in rich moist soil in a shady wood, we should have no trouble in
naturalising this graceful fern, the fronds of which are such graceful
objects in the dense woods of the “great country.”

=Agave americana.=--This and its variegated varieties are plants
peculiarly suited for subtropical gardening, being useful for placing
out of doors in summer in vases, tubs, or pots plunged in the ground,
and also for the conservatory in winter. It forms a large rosette of
thick fleshy leaves of a glaucous ashy-green colour, overlapping each
other at the base, from 4 ft. to 6½ ft. long, and from 6 ins. to 10 ins.
broad, ending in a strong spine, and having numerous spines along the
margin. When the plant flowers, which it does only once, and after
several years’ growth, it sends up a flowering-stem from 26 ft. to
nearly 40 ft. high. The flowers are of a yellowish-green colour, and are
very numerous on the ends of the chandelier-like branches. It will grow
in any moderately dry greenhouse or conservatory in winter, or even in a
large hall, and may be placed out of doors at the end of May and brought
in in October. All the varieties are easily increased from suckers. N.
America.

=*Agrostis nebulosa.=--This beautiful annual grass forms most delicate
feathery tufts about 1 ft. or 15 ins. in height, terminated when in
flower by graceful panicles of spikelets, which are at first of a
reddish-green colour, and afterwards change to a light red in the upper
part, the remaining two-thirds being of a deep green: the pedicels are
extremely slender and of a violet colour. It forms very handsome
edgings, and is very valuable for bouquets, vases, baskets, room and
table decoration, etc. If cut shortly before the seed ripens, and dried
in the shade, it will keep for a long time. Dyed in various colours it
is much used by makers of artificial flowers. It may be sown either in
September or in April or May. In the former case it will flower from May
to July, in the latter from July to September. The seed, being very
fine, should be only slightly covered. Though small, this deserves a
place in groups of the finer and dwarfer plants, such as _Thalictrum
minus_, and also in herbaceous borders. Spain.

=*Ailantus glandulosa.=--Much trouble and expense are incurred in the
purchase, growth, and protection of tender plants with fine compound
leaves like this, but which in our climate never display anything like
the fresh vigour, health, spotless appearance, and youthful grace
characteristic of hardy subjects. This is one of the most valuable of
the hardy trees which, if kept in a dwarf state by being planted young
and cut down annually, will furnish as good an effect as any tropical
plant. The Ailantus should be kept in a young state, with a single stem
clothed with its superb pinnate leaves; and we can readily keep it in
this form by planting it young and cutting it down annually, taking care
to prevent it from breaking into an irregular head, as then the symmetry
of the leaf beauty becomes confused and is not at all so effective as
when it is kept to a single stem. Vigorous young plants and suckers in
good soil will produce handsome, arching, elegantly divided leaves 5 ft.
and even 6 ft. long, not to be surpassed by those of any stove-plant.
Under such treatment it could be grown conveniently to about from 4 ft.
to 7 ft. high, and would thus do grandly for association with the larger
class of garden flowers--Gladioli, Dahlias, and Hollyhocks, for
example--while among Cannas and the like it will prove fine. The leaves
are not liable to be attacked by insects--a good point in a plant used
for the purpose I suggest--and they retain their healthy green till the
first frosts in November, when they suddenly drop off. It is propagated
with facility by cuttings of the roots, but is cheap in all nurseries.
China and Japan.

=*Aira pulchella.=--One of the most ornamental grasses, with numerous
hair-like stems, growing in light elegant tufts 6 ins. to 8 ins. high.
It is useful for forming very handsome edgings, or for interspersing
amongst plants in borders, or growing in vases or pots for
room-decoration. Its delicate panicles give an additional charm to the
finest bouquets. May be sown either in September or in April. S. Europe.

=*Alisma Plantago.=--A native perennial water-plant, growing nearly 3
ft. high, and bearing a very handsome pyramidal panicle of rosy-white
flowers from June to September. The leaves are oval-lance-shaped with a
cordate base, and are borne nearly erect on long stalks for some
distance above the surface of the water. A graceful object on the
margins of ponds, lakes, etc., where a plant of it transferred from any
place where it grows will soon increase.

=Alsophila excelsa.=--A noble tree-fern, native of Norfolk Island, where
it attains a height of 40 ft., crowned with a magnificent circular crest
of bipinnate fronds. These fronds or branches fall off every year,
leaving an indentation in the trunk. It stands well in the open air in
this country in shady, moist, and thoroughly well sheltered places. It
should be put out at the end of May, and taken indoors at the end of
September or early in October, and receive warm-greenhouse or
temperate-house treatment in winter. The same remarks apply to _A.
australis_, and probably others of the family will be found to thrive
well in the open air when sufficiently plentiful to be tried in that
position.


*THE AMARANTUSES.

Among the common annuals of our gardens I know of none more in want of
judicious use and appreciation than these. The few we grow are usually
treated as rough common annuals, and sown so thickly that they never
attain half their true development, or never fulfil any of the graceful
uses for which they are adapted. But the family possesses greater claims
on our attention by reason of the more recent additions to it. The old
“Love lies bleeding” (_A. caudatus_), with its dark-red pendent racemes,
is a very striking object when well grown, but _A. speciosus_ and some
of the more recent varieties are still more so.

=*Amarantus caudatus.=--A hardy and vigorous-growing species, from 2 ft.
to 3¼ ft. high. Flowers from July to September, dark purplish, very
small, collected in numerous whorls, which are disposed in drooping
spikes so as to form a handsome pendent panicle. There is a variety
which has yellow flowers and is equally hardy. It is advisable to give
this plant plenty of room to spread; otherwise much of its picturesque
effect will be lost; and to use it in positions where its fine and
peculiar habit may be seen to advantage,--as, for example, in large
vases, edges of large beds of subtropical plants, or dotted among
low-growing flowering plants. Although as easily raised as any common
annual, it deserves to be properly thinned out, and each plant isolated
in rich ground, so that it may attain its full size. E. Indies.

=*Amarantus sanguineus.=--Is distinguished by the blood-red colour of
its leaves, and grows about 3 ft. high. Its purple flowers appear from
July to October, disposed partly in small heads in the axils of the
upper leaves, and partly in slender, flexible spikes which form a
panicle more or less branching. This plant, though a native of the East
Indies, is quite hardy, and seems to do best in light soil with plenty
of leaf-mould and having a warm aspect. It may be sown in hotbeds in
April and pricked out in May, or in the open air at the end of April or
beginning of May, and, like the others, should never be allowed to get
crowded.

=*Amarantus speciosus.=--A very large kind, well adapted for associating
with subtropical plants, as it grows from 3 ft. to nearly 5 ft. high.
The flowers are very numerous, of a dark crimson purple, and arranged in
large erect spikes, forming a fine plumy panicle. The leaves are
suffused with a reddish tinge. Plants of this species are occasionally
met with having leaves with a light green centre surrounded by wavy
zones of a reddish hue. This colouring disappears at the time of
flowering. It is an effective subject in the autumn months. Culture, the
same as for the preceding kind. Nepaul.

=*Amarantus tricolor.=--Distinguished by the very handsome and
remarkable colouring of its leaves, which are of a fine transparent
purplish-red, or dark carmine, from the base to the middle. A large spot
of lively transparent yellow occupies the greater part of the upper end
of the leaf, and sometimes covers it altogether, with the exception of
the point, which is mostly green. The leaf-stalk is either of a light
green or yellow colour. Sometimes leaves occur which have the lower half
green and the upper part red. Another variety (_bicolor_) has leaves of
a tender green variously streaked with light yellow. It is rather
delicate, and requires very good soil, and a warm, open aspect. Another
variety (_bicolor ruber_) is hardier than the last-named, and has leaves
which are of a brilliant glistening scarlet when young, gradually
changing to a dark violet-red mixed with green. Another variety
(_ruber_) has a more squat and ramified habit, and leaves of a deep
rose-colour thickly clothing the stems. Other varieties recommended are
_elegantissimus_ (with scarlet leaves), _Gordoni_, _melancholicus
ruber_, and _versicolor_, all having some claims as bedding plants. The
foliage of these varieties is exceedingly ornamental, and rivals the
finest flowers in the richness of its hues. Planted along with
large-leaved subjects, such as the Cannas, Wigandias, Ricinus, Solanums,
etc., the effect is very fine. They may also be advantageously employed
in borders and flower-beds of all sizes, and for fringing the edges of
shrubberies. The varieties of _A. tricolor_ are a little more tender
than the other kinds, and a light soil and a warmer position are
necessary for them. They do well in gardens by the seaside. They should
be sown in April in a hotbed, pricked out in a hotbed, and finally
planted permanently about the end of May. _A. t. giganteus_ is described
as very fine in recent catalogues of the nurserymen. To these may be
added a beautiful new kind, _A. salicifolius_, in the possession of the
Messrs. Veitch, but not yet sent out. It has highly coloured and very
long, narrow, and arching leaves, and is a singularly graceful and
brilliant object. E. Indies.

=*Andropogon squarrosus= is a hardy East Indian grass, which survives
the winter with but slight protection, making luxuriant tufts seven feet
high, or more, when in flower. It would probably make a beautiful object
in the warmer and milder parts of England and Ireland in good soil, but
it is not a subject which can with confidence be recommended for every
garden. However, all who value fine grasses should try it. Well-drained
and deep-sandy loam.


*ARALIAS.

This genus embraces many plants of very diverse aspects, and few that
are fitted for the open air in our climate; but in the case of _A.
canescens_, and its relative (_A. spinosa_), the Angelica-tree of North
America, we have subjects which thrive perfectly well in our gardens,
and which in the size and beauty of their leaves are far before many
“foliage-plants” carefully cultivated in hothouses at a perpetual
expense.

=*Aralia canescens.=--The specimen of this species figured was one of a
batch of young plants growing in a London nursery, and sketched in the
summer of 1868. The engraving falls far short of rendering the beauty of
the plant. It is easy to imagine what a graceful effect may be realised
by such an object, either isolated on the turf near the edge of a
shrubbery, or grouped with subjects of similar character. Success with
these plants may be secured by first selecting a sheltered and warm
position, so that their noble leaves may be well developed and not
lacerated by storms when they are fully grown; secondly, by giving them
a deep, free, and thoroughly-drained soil; and thirdly, by confining
them as a rule to a simple and rather dwarf stem, so that the vigour of
the individual may not be wasted in several branches. The effect of a
plant kept to a single stem, as shown in the plate, is always much
superior to that of a branched one. Young plants present this aspect
naturally; but old ones may be cut down,

[Illustration: ARALIA CANESCENS.

Deciduous fine-leaved Shrub; hardy everywhere.]

when they will shoot vigorously. If the effect of a full-grown specimen
be desired, the shrubbery is the place for it. = _A. japonica (Hort.)._

=*Aralia edulis.=--This is a vigorous herbaceous perennial, well suited
for those positions in which we desire a luxuriant type of vegetation.
It is perfectly hardy, is of a fresh and vigorous habit, and grows 6, 7,
and even 8 ft. high in good soil, even so early as the end of June. The
leaves attain a length of nearly a yard when the plant is strong, while
the shoots droop a little with their weight, and thus it acquires a
slightly weeping character. It is rare in this country now, but, being
easily propagated, may, it is to be hoped, not long prove so. As it dies
down rather early in autumn, it must not be put in important groups, but
rather in a position where its disappearance may not be noticed. An
isolated position, or one near the margin of an irregular shrubbery,
fernery, or rough rockwork by the side of a wood walk, will best suit
it. Japan. Division.

=*Aralia japonica.=--A valuable species, quite distinct from any of the
others, with undivided, fleshy, dark-green leaves. It is usually treated
as a green-house plant, but is hardy and makes a very ornamental and
distinct-looking shrub on soils with a dry porous bottom. It grows
remarkably well in the dwelling-house; in fact it is one of the very few
plants of like character that will develop their leaves therein in
winter. Not difficult to obtain, it may be used with advantage in the
flower-garden or pleasure-ground among medium-sized plants--say those
not more than a yard high. It would form striking isolated specimens on
the turf, and is also very suitable for grouping. A native of Japan. =
_A. Sieboldi._

[Illustration: Aralia japonica.]

=*Aralia nudicaulis.=--A very vigorous perennial, with a smooth stem
scarcely rising out of the ground, bearing large leaves with
long-stalked, oval-oblong, pointed, toothed leaflets, and a shorter
naked flower-stem, with from two to seven umbels of blossoms. Roots
several feet long and highly aromatic. Similar uses to those directed
for _A. edulis_. North America.

=Aralia papyrifera= (_Chinese Rice-paper Plant_).--This, though a native
of the hot island of Formosa, flourishes vigorously with us in the
summer months, and is one of the most valuable plants in its way, being
useful for the greenhouse in winter and the flower-garden in summer. It
is handsome in leaf and free in growth, though to do well it must, like
all the large-leaved things,

[Illustration: Aralia papyrifera.]

be protected from cutting breezes. If this Aralia be planted in a dwarf
and young state, it is likely to give more satisfaction than if planted
out when old and tall. The leaves spread widely out near the ground, and
then it is very ornamental through the summer. Prefer therefore dwarf
stocky plants when planting it in early summer. It should have rich,
deep soil and plenty of water during the hot summer months. For the
public gardens of Paris it is kept underground in caves during the
winter; but in private gardens it will doubtless be thought worthy of a
place in the greenhouse throughout that season. In Battersea Park a bed
of _A. papyrifera_, 13 ft in diameter, attained a height of 5 ft, from
cuttings struck in the spring of 1868. The plants were left out all the
next winter, and, although killed to the ground, the thick fleshy roots
next season produced numerous strong shoots or suckers. These were
produced irregularly, and so numerously that they had to be thinned out
in many places; a few spaces only requiring to be filled up. It is
easily increased by cuttings of the root, and is usually planted in
masses, edged with a dwarfer plant; but as a small group in the centre
of a bed of flowers, or even as an isolated specimen in a like position,
it is most excellent.

=*Aralia racemosa= (_American Spikenard_).--An herbaceous species, with
smooth, widely-branching, diverging stems, about 4 ft. in height, and
pinnate, slightly downy leaves with ovate heart-shaped leaflets. Flowers
numerous, white, in racemose umbels. Thrives best in good soil in shady
or half-shady positions. Similar positions, etc., to those for _A.
nudicaulis_ and _edulis_. N. America.

=*Aralia spinosa= (_Angelica tree of North America_) is highly useful,
in consequence of its beauty of foliage, among subtropical plants. Like
many of the hardy things, it should not be placed in positions where it
would be necessary to remove it, nor closely associated with tender
plants requiring frequent disturbance of the soil Flowers in autumn,
small, white, in numerous umbels arranged on a much-branched panicle
beset with velvety stellate down. The leaves are twice and thrice
pinnate, with ovate, deeply serrated, smooth leaflets. In most cases it
grows with a single erect stem--the very type we require--and it should
not be allowed to depart from this habit. The stem is fiercely arrayed
with spines. On account of its umbrella-like head this fine thing has
often been planted in exposed open spaces, where it would produce a
distinct feature, but it is better planted where the great leaves will
not be lacerated. It generally grows not more than 10 ft. high; and in
every size from that down to a plant with a stem not more than 18 ins.
high, it may be effectively used in the ornamental garden. It is
propagated by cuttings of the roots. N. America.

=Aralia macrophylla= is a fine large digitate-leaved species which
stands summer exposure pretty well, but does not make any growth in the
open air; hence it can be but of comparatively slight importance for
this purpose. Norfolk Island.

=Areca sapida.=--A New Zealand palm from 6½ ft. to nearly 10 ft. high,
with a beautiful crown of bright-green pinnate leaves, which when young
are tinged with a bronze colour: leaflets from 16 ins. to 2 ft. in
length, lance-shaped. The young leafstalks are of a greyish red hue. A
fine palm for placing in the open air in summer, and equally so for the
conservatory in winter and spring. It is of very easy culture, if
supplied with plenty of water.

=Aristolochia Sipho.=--This well-known huge-leaved plant is capable of
being used with excellent effect where large and distinct foliage is
desired. Generally it is used as a wall plant; but it is far finer when
used to cover bowers or any like structure. I have seen a most effective
object formed by making the framework of a tent loosely with rough
boughs, and then planting the Aristolochia around it. It formed a dense
green and singular-looking wigwam. _A. tomentosa_ is smaller, but
distinct in tone of green, well worthy of a place, and to be employed
in like manner. N. America.

=*Artemisia anethifolia.=--A hardy perennial species about 4 ft. high,
with a simple round stem, woody at the base, and branching vertically
above, clothed from about a foot above the ground with much-divided
leaves, the segments of which are almost thread-like. Flowers very
numerous, small, in a dense, large, terminal panicle, with erect
branches. Useful in groups, or as isolated specimens in beds or borders.
Division.

=*Artemisia annua= (_Annual Wormwood_).--An exceedingly graceful kind of
wormwood, with tall stems reaching to a height of 5 ft. or 6 ft. in a
season; the foliage is small and fine, and the flowers inconspicuous but
arranged in not inelegant panicles. The hue of the plant is a peculiarly
fresh and pleasing green, and it forms an elegant object in the centre
of a flower-bed or group with plants of like character. Raised from seed
as easily as any half-hardy annual.

=*Artemisia gracilis.=--An exceedingly graceful plant, 3 or 4 ft. high,
with leaves cut into very fine hair-like segments, having some
resemblance to fennel or other umbelliferous plants with minutely-cut
leaves, and of a deep grass-green, except in the hearts of the shoots,
where the young leaves are unfolding, where there is a slight hoary
pubescence. The flowers are in compound panicles, quite obscure, of a
pale green, not at all ornamental in the common sense, but forming a not
ungraceful inflorescence. However, the plant is only likely to be grown
for its graceful foliage and habit, and the flowers, which only appear
in autumn, may be pinched off if not admired. Similar positions to
those recommended for the preceding species. Seed.

=*Arum crinitum.=--The appearance of this plant when in flower is very
grotesque from the singular shape of its broad, speckled, contorted
spathe. The leaves are divided into five or seven deep segments, the
central division being much broader than the others, and the
leaf-stalks, overlapping each other, form a sort of spurious stem a foot
or 14 ins. high, marbled and spotted with purplish-black. The treatment
for this plant is similar to that given for _A. Dracunculus_; but as it
is rather more tender, it will require more care and shelter in winter.
Warm borders, fringes of shrubberies, or beds of the smaller subtropical
plants, will suit it best. The appearance of the flower is almost too
repulsive for the nerves of some persons. Division. S. of Europe.

=*Arum Dracunculus.=--A strange-looking but handsome plant, with a white
stem curiously marbled with black, about 3 ft. high, and very deeply cut
palm-like leaves, broadly veined and spotted with white. The spathe is
of a pale green colour on the outside and of a deep purple-violet
within, and, as well as the flowers, exhales a powerful carrion odour.
Requires a light, deep, and dry soil, and does best in half-shady
positions. Easily multiplied by division in spring or autumn. It is best
fitted for the fringes of shrubberies, etc., or among the vegetation
that sometimes starts from the bottoms of warm walls. S. of Europe.

=*Arum italicum.=--This plant, which is a native of the Isle of Wight
and the Channel Islands, resembles the common _A. maculatum_ in habit
and in the shape of its leaves, which are, however, of a dark
bluish-green colour, handsomely spotted with white, and marked with
yellow veinings. Although it is a very hardy plant, and will thrive
almost anywhere in moist soil and a shady position, it will be better to
place it in sheltered positions along the sunny fronts of shrubberies,
amidst low-spreading evergreens, and in cosy spots about the flanks of
rock work and ferneries, to prevent its handsome foliage from being
disfigured by cold wintry winds. One great merit of this is that it may
be used to ornament positions in which few other plants will
thrive,--as, for instance, under trees, groups of shrubs, etc. Easily
multiplied by division in the end of summer and in autumn. S. of Europe.

=*Arundo conspicua.=--A companion for the Pampas grass, though by no
means equal to it, as has been stated by some writers. In some very fine
deep and free sandy loams it attains a height of nearly 12 ft., but this
is rare. As a conservatory subject it is fine in flower, and it will be
often seen in large conservatories after a few years. A large pot or tub
will be necessary if it is grown indoors. The drooping foliage will
always prove graceful, and it sends up long silvery plumes, drooping
also, and strikingly beautiful. Judging by its different appearance when
freely grown in a tub indoors, and when planted out even in favourable
spots, my impression is that it by no means takes so kindly to our
northern climate as the Pampas grass. However, it is well worth growing,
even in districts where it does not attain a great development. It comes
into flower before the Pampas grass, and may be considered as a sort of
forerunner of that magnificent herb. New Zealand.

=*Arundo Donax.=--This great reed of the south of Europe is a very noble
plant on good soils. In the south of England it forms canes 10 ft. high,
and has a very distinct and striking aspect. It will grow higher than
that if put in a rich deep soil in a favoured locality; and those who so
plant clumps of it on the turf in their pleasure-grounds will not be
disappointed at the result. Nothing can be finer than the aspect of this
plant when allowed to spread out into a mass on the turf of the
flower-garden or pleasure-ground. It seems much to prefer deep sandy
soils to heavy ones; indeed, I have known it refuse to grow on heavy
clay soil, and flourish most luxuriantly on a deep sandy loam in the
same district. Like all large-leaved plants, it loves shelter. No garden
or pleasure-ground in the southern parts of England and Ireland should
be without a tuft of it in a sheltered spot. But, fine as it is for
effect and distinctness, its variegated variety is of more value for the
flower-garden proper.

=*Arundo Donax versicolor.=--We have already noticed several fine things
for grouping together, or for standing alone on the turf and near the
margin of a shrubbery-border, and this is as well suited for close
association with the choicest bedding-flowers as an Adiantum frond is
with a bouquet. It will be found hardy in the southern counties, and,
considerably north of London, may be saved by a little mound of
cocoa-fibre, sifted coal-ashes, or any like material that may be at
hand. In consequence of its effective variegation, it never assumes a
large development, like the green or normal form of the species, but
keeps dwarf, and yet thoroughly graceful. It is of course best suited
for warm, free, and good soils, and abhors clay, though it is quite
possible to grow it even on that with a little attention to the
preparation of the ground. But it is in all cases better to avoid things
that will not grow freely and gracefully on whatever soil we may have to
deal with: and it is to those having gardens on good sandy soils, and in
the warmer parts of England, that I would specially recommend this grand
variegated subject. For a centre to a circular bed nothing can surpass
it in the summer and autumn flower-garden, while numerous other charming
uses may be made of it. Not the least happy of these would be to plant a
tuft of it on the green turf, in a warm spot, near a group of choice
shrubs, to help, with many other things named, to fill up the gap that
is now nearly everywhere observed between ordinary fleeting flowers and
the taller tree and shrub vegetation. It is better to leave the plant in
the ground, in a permanent position, than to take it up annually.
Protect the roots in the winter, whether it be planted in the middle of
a flower-bed or by itself in a little circle on the grass. Increased by
placing a shoot or stem in a tank of water, when little plants with
roots will soon start from every joint; they should be cut off, potted,
and placed in frames, where they will soon become strong enough for
planting out.

=*Arundo Phragmites= (_Common Reed_).--A native marsh-or water-plant, 5
ft. or 6 ft. high, bearing when in flower a large, handsome, spreading,
purplish panicle. The stems are smooth, simple, very erect, and grow
closely together. The plant is only attractive when in flower, as its
flat, ribbon-like leaves do not of themselves present any very striking
appearance. Useful for the margins of artificial waters, etc., to which
it may be brought from its wild haunts. It should, however, if possible,
be kept in one spot and not allowed to spread too much.

=*Asclepias Cornuti.=--A handsome hardy perennial from N. America,
sending up from its running, underground rootstock a number of erect,
unbranched stems, from 4 ft. to 6½ ft. high, thickly covered with large
opposite oval leaves. The flowers are of a light rose-colour, and
agreeably fragrant, and are borne in large umbels at the tops of the
stems. The plant does well in almost any kind of soil or position, and
is well adapted for planting in places which do not require much
attention. As it spreads very rapidly at the root, it is better to
exclude it from small beds or gardens, which would soon be overrun by
it. Several other species are in cultivation, the best of which are _A.
speciosa_ (Douglasii), _A. incarnata_, and _A. tuberosa_.

=*Asparagus Broussoneti= (_Giant Asparagus_).--A vigorous, climbing
asparagus, with a tapering, shrubby stem, 10 or 12 ft. high. The flowers
are small and inconspicuous, and are followed by numerous small red
berries. An excellent subject for tall trellises, rustic bowers, stumps
of trees, tall poles, etc. Canary Islands.

=Asplenium Nidus-avis.=--This is a remarkable fern, which has been
placed out of doors in the garden in summer, from early in June to
October; but it is not vigorous or hardy enough to be generally
recommended for this purpose. However, as it may have been noticed in
abundance at Battersea Park, I allude to it here. The leaves are rather
broad, pointed, and undulating, nearly 3 ft. long, and form roundish,
spreading, nest-like tufts. It is a favourite subject in places where
large collections of tropical ferns are grown, and in such places a
plant may be tried in the open air in a very warm, shady, and perfectly
sheltered position. E. Indies.

[Illustration: Asplenium Nidus-avis.]

=*Astilbe rivularis.=--A large-leaved and striking plant from Nepaul,
with the habit and general appearance of a _Spiræa_, growing to a height
of more than 3 ft., and of a free and graceful habit, which makes it
useful for association with the finer-foliaged herbaceous plants, and
for dotting here and there in the wild or picturesque garden. It keeps
its foliage well through the season, unlike some herbaceous plants, and
is therefore all the more valuable. Flowers late in summer, small,
yellowish-white, in large panicled spikes. The radical leaves are broad,
twice ternate with toothed divisions, and the base of the leaf-stalk is
covered with numerous rough tawny hairs. Being pretty hardy, the
Astilbe usually succeeds well in any cool rich soil, and best in
half-shaded positions. Easily multiplied by division. It is suited for
isolation, borders, fringes of shrubberies, or for groups of hardy
plants.

*=Astilbe rubra.=--A very pretty and hardy plant, also resembling a.
_Spiræa_ in habit and appearance, and growing from 4 ft. to 6 ft. high.
The leaves are twice ternate, with oblique, heart-shaped leaflets, 1 in.
to 2 ins. long, and with lengthened serrated points. The flowers are
numerous, in dense panicles, and of a rose-colour, appearing late in
summer and in autumn. The same positions, etc., as those for the
preceding kind. North America, Japan, and mountains of Northern India.

=*Bambusa.=--I wish to call the attention of all horticulturists who
live in the southern and more favoured parts of these islands to the
fact that there are several bamboos and bamboo-like plants from rather
cool countries that are well worth planting. Nothing can exceed the
grace of a bamboo of any kind if freely grown; but if starved in a
crowded house, or grown in a cold dry place, where the graceful shoots
cannot arch forth in all their native beauty, nothing can be more
miserable in aspect. In cold bad soils and exposed dry places in the
British Isles these bamboos have little chance; but, on the other hand,
they will be found to make most graceful objects in many a sheltered
nook in the south and southwestern parts of England and Ireland. We have
some knowledge of the capabilities of one kind in this country. In a
well-sheltered moist spot at Bicton I have seen _Bambusa falcata_ send
up young shoots, long and graceful, like the slenderest of fishing-rods,
while the older ones were branched into a beautiful mass of light
foliage of a distinct type. The same plant grows in the county of Cork
to a height of nearly 20 ft. This is the best known kind we have. At
Paris I was fortunate enough to observe various other kinds doing very
well indeed, although the climate is not so suitable as that of Cork or
Devon. These were _Bambusa edulis_, _aurea_, _nigra_, _Simonii_,
_mitis_, _Metake_, and _viridi-glaucescens_, the first and last of this
group being very free and good. All the others will prove hardy in the
south of England and Ireland, though, as some of them have not yet been
tried there, it requires the test of actual experiment. Those who wish
to begin cautiously had better take _B. Simonii_, _viridi-glaucescens_,
and _edulis_ to commence with, as they are the most certainly hardy, so
far as I have observed. The best way to treat any of these plants,
obtained in summer or autumn, would be to grow them in a cool frame or
pit till the end of April, then harden them off for a fortnight or so,
and plant out in a nice warm spot, sheltered also, with good free
soil--taking care that the roots are carefully spread out, and giving a
good free watering to settle the soil. There are no plants more worthy
of attention than these where the climate is at all favourable, and
there are numerous moist nooks near the sea-side where they will be
found to grow most satisfactorily, as well as in the south.

=*Bambusa aurea.=--A very hardy and graceful Chinese species, differing
but slightly from _B. viridi-glaucescens_ in size and habit, and forming
elegant tufts with its slender much-branched stems, which attain a
height of from 6½ ft. to 10 ft., and are of a light-green colour when

[Illustration: BAMBUSA AUREA.

Thriving in warm and mild southern districts.]

young, changing into a yellowish hue, and finally becoming of a
straw-yellow when fully grown. The leaves are lance-shaped acute, light
green, and are distinguished from those of _B. viridi-glaucescens_ by
having their under surface less glaucescent, and the sheath always
devoid of the long silky hairs. The preliminary remarks on culture,
etc., will apply to all the species here described.

=*Bambusa edulis.=--A hardy and vigorous kind, with very elegant
light-green shoots and olive-green stems, attaining a height of 10 ft.
in the neighbourhood of Paris. The leaves are small, and the plant is
not nearly so branching as in some other kinds.

=*Bambusa falcata= (_Arundinaria falcata_).--A very ornamental species
from Nepaul and the Himalayas, and at present the only kind of bamboo
much planted with us. It grows from 7 ft. to 20 ft. high, and has woody,
twisted, smooth stems of a yellowish-green or straw-colour, knotty,
bearing on one side of each of the knots a bundle of small branches
equally knotty and twisted. The whole plant has a pale yellowish hue,
except in the young spikelets and sheaths, which are occasionally
purplish. The leaves are of a fine delicate green, from 4 ins. to 6 ins.
long, ribbon-like, linear-acute, sickle-shaped, in two rows,
short-stalked, and sheathing. It is hardy over the greater part of
England and Ireland, but only attains full development in the south and
west. I have seen it attain great luxuriance in Devon, and nearly 20 ft.
high near Cork, though in many districts it is stunted. It loves a deep,
sandy, and rich soil, and plenty of moisture when growing fast.

=*Bambusa Fortunei.=--A pretty dwarf variegated species from Japan, of
which I have not seen the green form in cultivation, with very dwarf,
slender, branching, hollow, half-shrubby stems, seldom growing more than
18 ins. high, and with very short internodes. The leaves are 3½ ins. to
8 ins. long, linear-lance-shaped, abruptly pointed, somewhat rounded at
the base, serrated and often fringed with long hairs on the margin,
downy on both sides; they are distinctly variegated, the transverse
veins being often of a bottle-green colour; stalks very short and hairy.
This kind has proved hardy in our gardens, but it has not the charm of
grace possessed by the other kinds, and is chiefly desirable in
collections of variegated and edging plants.

=*Bambusa japonica= (_B. Metake_).--A large-leaved and rather dwarf
species from Japan, growing from 4 ft. to 7 ft. high, with erect
thickly-tufted stems, which are entirely covered by the sheaths of the
leaves; the branches are also erect. The leaves are lance-shaped, with a
very sharp point, dark green, persistent, narrowed into a short
leaf-stalk, and nearly a foot long. This species sometimes flowers with
extraordinary profusion at the expense of a portion of the foliage,
which withers away and leaves the naked stems exposed. This may,
however, be prevented to some extent, by placing the plants on mounds
somewhat above the level of the surrounding soil. I have seen it thrive
very freely in the late Mr. Borrer’s garden in Sussex, and in one or two
other places. It loves a peat soil, or a very free moist and deep loam,
and runs a good deal at the root.

=Bambusa mitis.=--A fine and vigorous kind from Cochin China, somewhat
tenderer than most of the other

[Illustration: BAMBUSA FALCATA.

Hardy Bamboo Section; growing 16 to 20 feet high in the milder southern
parts of England and Ireland.]

kinds enumerated, though no doubt it will be found to thrive in the
milder southern districts; or it may be found useful if grown in the
conservatory in winter and placed out in the open air in summer, as is
sometimes done with _B. arundinacea_, which otherwise could not possibly
be seen out of doors in our climate. Panicle simple, erect, close;
spikes long, imbricated. Leaves rather large, lance-shaped, striated,
clasping the stem, which is woody and tapering; nodes rather distant,
and not very prominent.

=*Bambusa nigra.=--A rather compact-growing Chinese kind, with nearly
solid stems, and thinner leaves than those of any other species. The
stems are smooth and bushy, about 7 ft. high, of a light green, dotted
and striped with purple when young, changing to a glistening black when
fully grown; they branch very much at the top, and sometimes from the
base up. The leaves are oval-oblong, acute, shortly-stalked, with a
hard, dry, persistent sheath; their tender green colour contrasting
finely with the blackish hue of the stems. It is best planted as
isolated specimens near the margins of shrubberies, or on slopes in the
pleasure-ground in warm, sunny, and sheltered positions, in deep, sandy,
and well-drained soil.

=*Bambusa Quilioi.=--A Japanese species of vigorous growth, with robust
green stems and bright-green leaves, polished above and slightly mealy
beneath, the ligule bearing a little bundle of brownish-grey hairs at
the top. This kind I first saw in the gardens of the Acclimatisation
Society at Paris, where it was thriving vigorously, and I have little
doubt of its proving valuable in Britain.

=*Bambusa Simonii.=--A handsome, distinct, and vigorous species, which
has grown very freely for some years past in the neighbourhood of Paris.
The stems are numerous and grow as much as 10 ft. high in a season. They
are mealy-glaucous at the joints, and the branchlets are numerous and
rather closely crowded. The leaves are narrow, sometimes nearly a foot
long, and are occasionally striped with white. This species, which was
obtained from China some years since, has thriven very well in the
gardens at Paris, where M. Carrière first drew my attention to it. From
what I have seen it do there I have no doubt it will prove of great
value in the milder southern parts of England and Ireland.

=*Bambusa violascens.=--A hardy and vigorous kind, intermediate between
_B. nigra_ and _B. viridi-glaucescens_, most resembling the
last-mentioned however. It has blackish-violet much-branched stems,
which assume a yellow tinge with age. The leaves are green above,
bluish-grey beneath, with an elongated ligule surrounded by a bundle of
black hairs. Native of China.

=*Bambusa viridi-glaucescens.=--A species from Northern China, which has
been proved very hardy and free in the Paris gardens, and will,
probably, in warm parts of our islands, make a more vigorous growth and
prove a more beautiful object than any other kind. The stems, of a
light-yellowish-green, grow from 7 ft. to 12 ft. high, branching from
the base, each branch again branching very much. The leaves are very
numerous, especially at the ends of the branches, of a pale-green,
bluish underneath, sheathing the stem for a considerable length. It
forms a fine object when planted as isolated specimens in sheltered warm
glades in the pleasure-ground, or in snug open spots near wood-walks,
in very deep, rich, light, and well-drained soil.

=*Bambusa viridis striata.=--Described as a vigorous-growing, hardy
kind, with numerous branches, having its long leaves green on both
sides, and marked with bands, some of a yellowish and others of a deeper
green. It is a native of Japan, and was recommended by MM. Thibaut and
Ketteleer of Paris, but I have had no experience of its growth.

=*Baptisia australis.=--A handsome hardy perennial from N. America,
forming strong bushy tufts from 3 ft. to 5 ft. high, and from 3 ft. to 6
ft. across, with sea-green trifoliate leaves which reflect a metallic
lustre. The flowers are of a delicate blue, with wings of a
greenish-white colour, and are borne in long erect spikes. Grows well in
ordinary, deep, well-drained soil, preferring a sandy loam. _B.
exaltata_ and _B. alba_ are closely allied to the preceding species, and
form equally handsome bushes. The foliage of these is of a character to
permit of their being grouped along with some of the finer perennial
foliage-plants with good effect. Division.

=*Berberis Aquifolium.=--A well-known shrub from N. America, with simple
stems from 3¼ ft. to 6½ ft. high, and very glistening, bright green
leaves, each consisting of 7 or 9 sessile, oval, spiny leaflets. Where
the plant is fully exposed to the sun, the foliage frequently acquires
an agreeable reddish tinge. There are numerous varieties, of which _B.
floribunda_ may be mentioned as very handsome in habit and profuse in
flower, and _B. nitens_, remarkable for the extremely glossy appearance
of the old leaves, which when young are of a rich bronze changing to a
dark green. This variety is of a dwarf and compact habit. It requires a
shady situation and a compost of peat, loam, and sand. Though so very
common, it will be found worth planting in some places among groups of
hardy things, and also for isolation on the turf, its leaves being very
ornamental.

=*Berberis Bealii.=--This is perhaps the finest of all the hardy
species, whether as regards foliage or flower, while the fruit, in
colour and size, surpasses that of any other kind. The leaflets vary to
a very great degree on the same plant, both in form and size, some being
5 ins. long and 3½ ins. broad, the average size being 3 ins. long by 2
ins. broad: some again are nearly square, while others are long and
narrow, with a very stiff triangular point. Shade, shelter from gusts of
wind, and rich, well-manured soil are absolutely necessary to do full
justice to the merits of this species. By pruning it to a single stem,
it may be made to assume a very effective palm-like character. It is
easily propagated from seed; a single berry frequently producing three
plants. Being a noble subject for quiet half-shady wood-walks in peat or
moist sandy loam, it should be much planted in the southern and milder
districts. Where it thrives freely, it would prove a fine object on the
margins of shrubberies grouped with the hardy “subtropical” plants, or
indeed in any position.

=*Berberis japonica.=--A very handsome species, 5 ft. or 6 ft. high,
with very leathery, pinnate, spiny leaves, from 1 ft. to 18 ins. long,
slightly tinged with pink when first opened, then becoming pale green,
and finally changing to dark green blotched with yellow. Flowers yellow,
in large racemes, succeeded by large handsome

[Illustration: BERBERIS NEPALENSIS.

Fine-leaved evergreen shrub Section; very effective when well-grown, in
the warmer southern districts.]

clusters of purple berries. This is also a fine kind for half-shady
walks, and for similar positions and soil to those recommended for _B.
Bealii_. Japan.

=*Berberis nepalensis.=--The noble habit of this plant makes it
peculiarly valuable, possessing, as it does, the grace of a luxuriant
fern with the rigidity of texture and port of a Cycas. The leaves are
occasionally 2 ft. in length and of a pale green colour, sometimes with
eight pairs of leaflets and an odd one: some of the leaflets 6 ins. long
and nearly 2 ins. broad, with coarse spiny teeth on the margin. The
inflorescence is very striking and beautiful. The Nepaul Barberry is one
of those subjects that are too hardy to perish in our climate, yet which
do not usually attain perfect development in it. It exists about London
in the open air, and flowers in early spring; but the leaves seldom
attain one-fourth of their full development, and the plant scarcely ever
displays its vigorous grace. In mild parts, principally in the south and
south-west, it grows more freely, and when judiciously placed in
sheltered positions, in deep and rather sandy soil, it becomes a
beautiful object. Where it thrives in the open air, it may be most
tastefully used in the more open spots near the hardy fernery, here and
there among “American plants,” or other choice shrubs with simple
leaves, and also isolated in the grass a little way from the margin of
the shrubbery in sheltered spots in the pleasure-ground. It should also,
in places favourable to its growth in the open air, prove very useful as
a hardy “subtropical” plant. Where it does not thrive well in the open
air, it should not be planted. Nepaul.

=*Beta cicla variegata= (_Chilian Beet_).--Under this name a very showy
plant has recently come into cultivation. When well grown the leaves are
often more than a yard long, and present a vivid and most striking
coloration. Their midribs are 4 ins. or more across, and vary from a
dark deep waxy orange to vivid polished crimson. The splendid hue of the
lower part of the leaf-stalk flows on towards the point, and spreads in
smaller streams through the main veins and ramifications of the great
soft blade of the leaf, which is often 1 ft. and even 15 ins. in
diameter, if the plant be in rich ground. The under sides of the leaves
are most richly coloured, and the habit such that these sides are well
seen. It requires the treatment of an annual--to be raised in a gently
heated frame, and afterwards planted out in very rich ground, though it
may also be kept over the winter in pots. It varies a good deal from
seed, and the most striking individuals should be selected before the
plants are put out. Used sparingly, its effect would perhaps be more
telling than if in quantity, and it is well suited for isolation. Chili.

=*Bocconia cordata.=--This is a fine plant in free soil, but
comparatively poor in that which is bad or very stiff. It forms handsome
erect tufts from 5 ft. to over 8 ft. high, and is admirably suited for
embellishing the irregular or sloping parts of pleasure-grounds. The
stems grow rather closely together, and are thickly set with large,
reflexed, deeply-veined, oval-cordate leaves, the margins of which are
somewhat lobed or sinuated. The flowers, which are rosy-white and very
numerous, are borne in very large terminal panicles. The flowers are not
in themselves pretty, but the inflorescence, when the plant is well
grown,

[Illustration: BLECHNUM BRASILIENSE.

Dwarf tender Tree Fern: in sheltered shady dells during the summer
months.]

has a distinct and pleasing appearance. The plant is seen to best effect
when isolated, and does well in ordinary garden-soil or free sandy loam.
It attains its greatest size when placed in the angle of two walls which
shelter it from the north and east, which seems to indicate that it does
not like sudden changes of temperature and light. It should not be
stirred too often, nor divided for several years. It will prove a good
thing for associating with other fine hardy plants in bold groups. Seed
or cuttings. China.

[Illustration: Bocconia cordata.]

=Bocconia frutescens.=--A vigorous-growing Mexican shrub, 3½ ft. to
nearly 6 ft. high, with few and very brittle branches, large, sea-green,
handsome leaves, and greenish flowers. Very effective when placed on
grass-plats, either in groups, or as isolated specimens. It requires a
somewhat warmer climate than ours to thrive well, though it is sometimes
seen in fair condition in the London parks. A mixture of free sandy loam
and peat, well-drained ground, and an airy position are necessary.
Multiplied by sowing in a hotbed in spring, and may be placed out from
June to the end of September. It is difficult to propagate it by
cuttings.

=*Brassica oleracea crispa.=--A handsome kind of cabbage nearly 4 ft.
high, with elegantly-cut arching leaves, the divisions of which are
finely curled or frizzled. In autumn and winter it may be advantageously
employed in the embellishment of winter-gardens, the leaves being at
their best during that part of the year.

A still more striking subject is _B. o. palmifolia_, which attains a
height of 6½ ft., and bears its leaves near the summit of the stem,
having quite a palm-like appearance in the end of the summer and in
autumn. This kind might be used with good effect in various positions,
as its “cabbage” character is not so evident. The fact of their being
cabbages prevents many people from using these really ornamental plants.

The variegated Kales have been much employed and with a very good result
in the winter-garden at Wardie Lodge in Scotland and in other places:
they lose their beauty early in spring. “To keep them dwarf and compact,
and to bring out their fine colours,” say Messrs. Stuart and Mein, “we
sow at the beginning of March thinly. After the plants are a moderate
size, we transplant them into a poorish soil, in an open space of
ground, but not too closely together. They remain there until they are
wanted for use, when they are removed at any time to the winter-garden.
We plant out into our beds in November, and keep the heads with their
foliage close to the ground. We cut off all the lower rough leaves,
leaving the rich-coloured head or centre, which in all weathers will be
found to stand up neat and trim, even in bright frosty weather. As the
plants are thus much reduced in size, they can be planted much closer in
the beds. We may add that, as in other hybrids, worthless plants will
occasionally make their appearance: these we discard. No plants should
be selected for the beds except those showing pleasing shades of
colour.”

=Brexia madagascariensis.=--A handsome shrub with a slender erect stem
(which sometimes attains a height of 25 ft. or 30 ft. in its native
country, but with us is seldom seen more than a fourth of that), clothed
with alternate, leathery, long, rather narrow, light-green leaves,
nearly or quite smooth at the margin. It is one of the tropical
stove-plants that have stood well in the open air from June to early in
October, but very few places can spare it for this purpose. It requires
ordinary stove culture during winter and spring, and should only be
placed out after having made a strong growth, and having that growth
hardened off. Madagascar.

[Illustration: Buphthalmum speciosum.]

=*Buphthalmum speciosum.=--A hardy, distinct, and vigorous herbaceous
plant, the stems of which are stout, very slightly branching, and about
4 ft. high, with broad, oval-acute leaves mostly clustered around the
base of the plant, the lower ones falling gracefully towards the earth.
The flowers, which have a red or purple disk and yellow rays, are more
than 2 ins. across, and are terminal, solitary, long-stalked, borne in
the axils of the upper leaves, and appear in June, July, or August,
according to the season. The plant seldom flowers well before the third
year. It is of easy culture in any soil, is increased by division in
autumn, winter, or spring, and is best fitted for association with the
more vigorous herbaceous plants in rough places. S. of Europe.

=Caladium esculentum.=--This species has, for outdoor work, proved the
best of a large genus with very fine foliage. It is only in the midland
and southern counties of Great Britain that it can be advantageously
grown, so far as I have observed; but its grand outlines and aspect when
well developed make it worthy of all attention, and of a prominent
position wherever the climate is warm enough for its growth. It may be
used with great effect in association with many fine foliage-plants; but
_Ferdinanda_, _Ricinus_, and _Wigandia_ usually grow too strong for it,
and, if planted too close, injure it. This may have been noticed
particularly in cases where it was used as a bordering to masses of the
strong-growing kinds above named. For all kinds of stonework, vases,
etc., it is peculiarly effective and beautiful. This plant, requires,
above all others, a thoroughly-drained, light, rich, warm soil. In times
of great heat, it should be plentifully watered, and occasionally with
liquid manure. The month of May is the best time for planting it out;
and if groups are formed, the plants should have an interval of 2 ft. or
2½ ft. between them. The foliage generally arrives at its full beauty
and development in August and September. At the approach of cold frosty
weather, all the leaves, or all but the central one, should be cut down
to within an inch or two from the crown, and a few days afterwards the
tubers should be taken up and left on the ground for a few hours to
dry:

[Illustration: CALADIUM ESCULENTUM.

Tender Section; displaying noble leaves during summer in the warmer
parts of the southern counties.]

[Illustration: COLOCASIA ODORATA.

Tender stove Section; will endure exposure only during summer in the
warmest parts of the southern counties.]

they should then be stored on the shelves of a greenhouse, or in a
cellar or other place where they will be sheltered from frost and
moisture. By placing the tubers in a hotbed in March, plants may be
obtained with well-grown leaves for planting out in the open air about
the end of May or the beginning of June. New Zealand.

=Caladium odorum= (_Colocasia odora_).--A very striking plant, with
stout stems usually from 3 ft. to 8 ft. in height, but growing much
taller in a warm stove. The leaves are erect, very broad, and
heart-shaped, marked with strong veinings, and frequently measure more
than 3¼ ft. in length. The flowers are exceedingly fragrant. It is a
fine subject for isolation on grass-plats, its tall arborescent habit
distinguishing it from all the other species; but it is unfortunately
too tender to thrive in our climate except in sunny sheltered dells in
the southern parts, and should not be planted out until June. E. Indies.

=*Calla æthiopica= (_Lily of the Nile_).--This well-known plant may be
grown either as an aquatic in pieces of ornamental water,
fountain-basins, etc., or in the open ground in cool, moist soil, and
equally well in positions exposed to the full sun and in those which are
shaded. Being so very distinct in leaf and beautiful in bloom, this old
favourite will be seen to as much advantage grouped with the smaller
fine-leaved plants in beds as ever it has been in our stoves or windows.
S. Africa.


*THE CANNAS.

If there were no plants of handsome habit and graceful leaf available
for the improvement of our flower-gardens but these, we need not
despair, for they possess almost every quality the most fastidious could
desire, and present a useful and charming variety. The larger kinds make
grand masses, while all may be associated intimately with
flowering-plants--an advantage that does not belong to some free-growing
things like the Castor-oil plant. The Canna ascends as boldly, and
spreads forth as fine a mass of leaves as these, but may be closely
grouped with much smaller subjects. The general tendency of most of our
flower-garden plants is to assume a flatness and dead level, so to
speak; and it is the special quality possessed by the Cannas for
counteracting this that makes them so valuable. Even the grandest of the
other subjects preserve this tameness of upper-surface outline when
grown in great quantities: not so these, the leaves of which, even when
grown in dense groups, always carry the eye up pleasantly from the
humbler plants, and are grand aids in effecting that harmony which is so
much wanted between the important tree and shrub embellishments of our
gardens and their surroundings, and the dwarf flower-bed vegetation.
Another good quality of these most useful subjects is their power of
withstanding the cold and storms of autumn. They do so better than many
of our hardy shrubs and plants, so that when the last leaves have been
blown from the Lime, and the Dahlia and Heliotrope have been hurt by
frost, you may see them waving as gracefully and as green as the
vegetation of a temperate stove. Many of the subtropical plants, used
for the beauty of their leaves, are so tender that they go off in
autumn, or require all sorts of awkward protection at that season; but
the Cannas last

[Illustration: CANNA.

The most important and generally useful of tender plants for our
climate. Many kinds are hardy if protected in winter.]

in good trim till the borders must be cleared. All sheltered situations,
places near warm walls, and nice snugly-warmed dells, are suitable
positions for them. They are generally used in huge and ugly masses,
both about Paris and London; but their true beauty will never be seen
till we learn to place them tastefully here and there among the
flowering-plants--just as we place sprigs of graceful fern in a bouquet.
A bed or two solely devoted to them will occasionally prove very
effective; but enormous meaningless masses of them, containing perhaps
several hundred plants of one variety, are things to avoid and not to
imitate. As to culture and propagation, nothing can be more simple: they
may be stored in winter, as readily as potatoes, under shelves in the
houses, in the root-room, or, in fact, anywhere if covered up to protect
them from frost. And then in spring, when we desire to propagate them,
nothing is easier than pulling the roots in pieces, and potting them
separately. Afterwards it is usual to bring them on in heat, and finally
harden them off previous to planting out in the middle of May; but a
modification of this practice is desirable, as some kinds are of a
remarkably hardy constitution, and make a beautiful growth if put out
without so much as a leaf on them. The soil for all Cannas should be
deep, rich, and light.

In rambling through the suburbs of Paris, I once came upon a tuft of
Canna springing up strongly through a box-edging--pretty good evidence
that it had remained there for some years. Upon inquiring of the
proprietor of the garden I found this was the case, and that he had no
doubt of the hardiness of several other kinds. They were planted not
more than 8 ins. or 10 ins. deep. When we remember that the Cannas are
amongst the most valuable plants we use for giving grace and verdure to
the flower-garden, this surely is a hint worthy of being acted upon, as,
of course, they will prove equally hardy with us. Considering their
diversity of colour and size, their graceful pointed habit and facility
of propagation, we must concede them the first place; but their
capability of being used by anybody who grows ordinary bedding-plants,
and the fact that they may be preserved so very easily through the
winter, enhance their value still more. Cannas, protected by a coating
of litter, have been left out in Battersea Park through severe winters,
and during the unfavourable summer of 1867 attained a height of nearly
12 ft. Where it is desired to change the arrangements as much as
possible every year, it may not be any advantage to leave them in the
ground, and in that case they may be taken up with the bedding-plants,
and stored as simply and easily as carrots. Wherever they are grown as
isolated tufts, in small groups, or in small beds, it will be best not
to take them up oftener than every second or third year. These noble
plants would also adorn the conservatory, which is often as devoid of
any dignified vegetation as the unhappy flower-gardens which are seen
all over the country. Few subjects would be more effective, none more
easily obtained.


SPECIES AND VARIETIES OF CANNA.

In the following list of the species and varieties of Canna, the first
thirteen kinds are considered species: but the finest kinds for garden
use will be found among the Hybrids and Varieties.

=Canna aurantiaca.=--A vigorous kind, 6½ ft. or more in height, with
large, broadly oval-lance-shaped leaves, of a pale green colour,
slightly waved on the margin. Flowers with rose-coloured outer, and
reddish inner, divisions, the upper lip being of an orange colour and
the lower one yellow dotted with orange. Rhizome tuberous, with long
subterranean shoots. Antilles.

=Canna discolor.=--One of the finest kinds, and, although it does not
flower regularly in the open air, one of the most valuable on account of
its foliage. The leaves are very large, broadly oval-oblong, the lower
ones tinged with a blood-red hue, and the upper ones veined or streaked
with purple. Stems reddish, stout, growing to a height of more than 6
ft. Flowers orange-red, with bright-red inner divisions. S. America.

=Canna edulis.=--A vigorous species, largely cultivated by the Peruvians
for the sake of its edible roots, growing from 6 ft. to 7 ft. high, the
stems tinged with deep purple. Leaves broadly oval-lance-shaped, green
tinged with purple maroon. Flowers large: external divisions purple,
upper internal division scarlet shaded with yellow, the lower one of an
orange-red. S. America.

=Canna flaccida.=--A species remarkable for the great size of its
flowers, which bear some resemblance to those of _Iris Pseud-acorus_.
They are entirely yellow, flaccid, few in number, and very transitory.
This is not a tall species, seldom exceeding 2 ft. 8 ins. in height.
Leaves oval-lance-shaped, erect, glaucescent. South America. This
species should not be confounded with the _C. flaccida_ of Willdenow
which is found on the shores of the Mississipi.

=Canna Gaboniensis.=--A species from the Gaboon River, with the habit of
_C. nepalensis_. Rhizomes large and round; stalks green, large; leaves
deep green lightly edged with purple, longish, acuminate; flowers
medium-sized, clear orange; habit fine, special; height 5½ ft. to 6 ft.

=Canna gigantea.=--A robust kind, growing about 6½ ft. high. Flowers in
summer, large and very handsome; external divisions orange red; internal
ones deep purple-red; spathes reddish. Leaves more than 2 ft. long;
stalks covered with a velvety down. S. America.

=Canna indica.=--Flowers in summer, tolerably large, irregular, in erect
spikes; external divisions light yellow; upper inner divisions of a
carmine-red; the lower one yellow dotted with carmine. Leaves large,
alternate, oval-lance-shaped; the stalks sheathing at the base. Stems 3
ft. to 6 ft. high. A variety (_C. i. superba_) has much larger flowers
of a scarlet colour. India. It is not nearly so useful or imposing in
appearance as some of the newer hybrid kinds.

=Canna iridiflora.=--Flowers in midsummer, large, lively rose-colour,
with a yellow spot on the lip; divisions of the calyx red, erect,
oval-acute; spikes somewhat drooping, issuing several together from the
same spathe. Leaves broadly oval-acuminate, slightly membranous at the
margin, and having some hairs at the lower part of the midrib. Stems 6
ft. to over 8 ft high. Peru. A somewhat tender species, and although one
of the finest, does not flower freely. To secure its blooming, the
plants should be taken up towards the end of summer, potted, and kept
in a hothouse through the winter. They should be watered moderately,
and, treated in this way, will almost always begin to show flower in the
ensuing spring.

=Canna limbata.=--This has numerous stems nearly 3 ft. high, and
oblong-lance-shaped, acute leaves. Flowers in long loose spikes issuing
from glaucous spathes tinged with red; outer divisions pale yellow;
upper lip scarlet edged with a yellow margin; lower lip red, with golden
reticulations. Brazil.

=Canna musæfolia.=--This species was formerly described in the English,
Dutch, and German horticultural journals under the name of _C. excelsa_.
It was named _musæfolia_ by M. Année, who introduced it into France in
1858, from the resemblance of its leaves to those of the Musa or
banana-tree. It reaches a height of more than 8 ft., and has green,
downy stems, and very large, oval, green leaves. Flowers small,
orange-yellow. It is a tender species without rhizomes, and requires to
be kept constantly growing. Peru.

=Canna nepalensis.=--A variety of _C. glauca_ (according to M. Chaté),
introduced into France by M. Wallich, director of the Botanic Garden at
Calcutta. About 6½ ft. high, with oval-lance-shaped glaucous leaves,
narrowed at both ends. Outer divisions of flower greenish-yellow; inner
ones, sulphur-coloured or light orange.

=Canna purpurea spectabilis.=--Rhizomes cylindrical. Stalks
medium-sized, purple. Leaves deep greenish purple, fair size. Flowers
small, scarlet. Rather uncommon; habit fine; height 6 ft. to 6½ ft. This
is a very hardy species, and has given rise to all the varieties with
red or striped leaves.

=Canna Warscewiczii.=--A very early-flowering species, easily raised
from seed, and if sown early in spring, may be used for decorative
purposes the same year. Stems numerous, reaching a height of somewhat
over 3 ft. Leaves oval-elliptical, narrowed at both ends, and deeply
tinged with dark purple. Flowers with brilliant scarlet inner divisions;
outer ones purplish. S. America. There are many handsome varieties of
this species in cultivation.

=Canna Alfred Dumesnil.=--Rhizomes clouded, elongated. Stalks medium
thickness, deep greenish-purple. Leaves medium-sized, acuminate and
erect, deep green striped with violet-purple. Flowers large,
well-formed, scarlet. Free-flowering; height 3½ ft. to 4 ft.

=Canna Annei.=--A vigorous kind, with numerous stiff stems, of a
sea-green colour, 6½ ft. high, and large green, glaucescent, oval-acute
leaves, 2 ft. long by 10 ins. wide. Flowers large, well-formed,
salmon-colour, continuing to appear from July until the first frosts.

=Canna Annei-rosea.=--Flowers late and scantily. Stems numerous, dark
green with a reddish base, attaining a height of nearly 10 ft. Flowers
small, carmine rose-colour. Leaves dark green, very narrow and pointed,
erect, about 2 ft. 4 ins. long. Rootstock long, conical-cylindrical,
reddish.

=Canna Annei-bicolor.=--A kind with rather thick green stems nearly 6
ft. high, with a violet-coloured base. Leaves light green, oval-acute.
Flowers few, of medium size, orange-coloured; the two upper petals
reddish. Rootstock of a violet colour.

=Canna Annei-floribunda.=--Resembles the type in habit and foliage, but
is not so tall, is more free-flowering, and has yellow leaves.

=Canna Annei-fulgida.=--Stems small, of a dark-red colour, from 3 ft. to
5 ft. high. Leaves deep purple, erect, 20 ins. long and 6 ins. wide.
Flowers large, well-opened, orange-red. Very tender.

=Canna Annei-marginata.=--Stems of medium size, dark-red colour, and
about 3½ ft. high. Leaves of a deep green with a dark-red margin.
Flowers rather large, orange-red. (Considered an inferior variety.)

=Canna Annei-discolor.=--Stems five or six in number, vigorous and
erect, of a uniform red hue, from 3 ft. to 5 ft. high. Leaves
lance-shaped, erect, of a light-red colour, 2½ ft. long and 10 ins.
wide. Flowers late and few, small, rose-coloured, tinged with yellow.
Rootstock conical, very small and short, covered with violet scales.

=Canna Annei-rubra.=--Rhizomes of good thickness. Stalks medium
thickness, purple. Leaves acuminate, deep green striped with purple,
good size; habit fine. Flowers bright orange, well-formed. One of the
most free-flowering Cannas. Height 6½ ft.

=Canna atronigricans.=--Stems of medium thickness, seldom exceeding 3¼
ft. in height. Leaves of a purplish shade passing into dark-red, of a
deeper hue than those of _C. nigricans_. Flowers few, of a golden-brown
colour. Rootstocks small and few, with reddish scales. A very handsome
but tender kind.

=Canna aurantiaca-splendida.=--Stems green, downy, rather thick, 6½ ft.
to over 8 ft. high. Leaves oval, erect, 2 ft. 4 ins. to 2½ ft. long and
1 ft. wide, with very prominent membranes. Flowers in September,
orange, well-formed, and of a good size. Rootstocks small. A very
vigorous-growing variety.

=Canna aurantiaca-zebrina.=--Stems brown, downy, 3¼ ft. to nearly 5 ft.
high. Leaves of a light green, striped with fine violet bands, and 2 ft.
in length by 10 ins. wide. Flowers very few, light red. Rootstocks few
and short.

=Canna Amelia.=--Stems of a sea-green colour, nearly 5 ft. high. Leaves
oval-acuminate, glaucous, and gracefully recurved. Flowers large,
well-opened, of a golden yellow, spotted with orange-purple on all the
petals. Rootstocks conical and cylindrical. Blooms abundantly and
continuously from July till the first frosts.

=Canna atropurpurea.=--Stems very small and downy, of a reddish hue, and
not exceeding 3¼ ft. in height. Leaves small, recurved, of an almost
black colour. Flowers rather large, of a reddish golden-brown.
Rootstocks small, cylindrical, closely crowded around the plant. This
variety seeds well and freely.

=Canna Abbé Rosier.=--Stems green, nearly 6 ft. high. Leaves erect, of a
glaucous sea-green shade. Flowers of medium size, light brown, tinged
with vermilion, not well-formed, and opening badly. Rootstocks conical
and cylindrical.

=Canna Bonetti.=--Stems vigorous, of a deep-red colour, glaucous towards
the top, and about 8½ ft. high. Leaves deep green, with deep-red veins
and edges, 2 ft. 4 ins. long, and over 8 ins. wide. Flowers rather
large, yellowish-brown, shaded with dark purple, well-formed and
well-opened. Rootstocks thick, elongated. Seeds freely and well.

=Canna Bonetti-major.=--Very like the preceding, but with much taller
stems and larger leaves and flowers.

=Canna Bonetti-semperflorens.=--Stems brown, 6½ ft. to over 8 ft. high.
Leaves lance-shaped, deeply tinged and margined with a dark-red shade.
Flowers rather large, of a wine-red colour. A very free bloomer.

=Canna Bourcier.=--Stems brown, 6½ ft. to nearly 10 ft. high. Leaves
long, lance-shaped, of a deep violet-red colour. Flowers of a brick-red
shaded with salmon-colour. Rootstocks conical, of medium size,
violet-coloured.

=Canna Bihorelli.=--Stems purple, 3¼ ft. to nearly 5 ft. high. Leaves
dark red, with a narrow purple margin. Flowers numerous, light red, in
handsome panicles. Rootstocks conical and rather numerous.

=Canna compacta-grandiflora.=--Stems brown, 3¼ ft. to nearly 5 ft. high.
Leaves dark red, not well set. Flowers very large, well-formed, of a
salmon-shaded-red, in handsome panicles. Rootstocks conical, rather
large, covered with reddish scales.

=Canna Chatei-discolor.=--Stems purple, very robust, 3¼ ft. to nearly 5
ft. high. Leaves thick and firm, of a deep green, finely rayed and
margined with purple. Flowers blood-red, well-formed. Rootstocks
conical, of medium size. A very shy bloomer.

=Canna Chatei-grandis.=--Stems brownish-purple, 6½ ft. high, when not
divided year after year. Leaves at first erect, afterwards deflected
throughout their entire length and spreading very much, 2 ft. 4 ins.
long and 1 ft. wide. Flowers late, crimson, in a handsome panicle.
Rootstocks brown, conical, very short. Ripens its seeds well.

=Canna Daniel Hooibrenk.=--Rhizomes large. Stalks strong, green. Leaves
large, glaucous-green, acuminate. Flowers large, bright orange.
Free-flowering; fine habit Height over 6 ft.

=Canna De Candolle.=--Stems green, about 4 ft. high. Leaves green, badly
set. Flowers very numerous, vermilion shaded with carmine. Rootstocks
conical.

=Canna discolor-floribunda.=--Stems dark red, 3¼ ft. to 4¼ ft. high.
Leaves oblong, 18 ins. long and 10 ins. wide, deep green striped with
purple. Flowers small, orange-red. Rootstocks conical, of medium size.
Ripens its seeds well.

=Canna Député Hénon.=--Stems green, not exceeding 4 ft. 10 ins. in
height. Leaves of a light glaucous-green, oval, acute, erect. Flowers
large, well-formed, of a pure canary-colour, with a brownish-yellow
base, in numerous spikes, which rise gracefully above the foliage to the
height of about 20 ins. Rootstocks cylindrical, elongated, standing at
some distance from the centre of the tuft. Ripens its seeds well.

=Canna Edward Morren.=--Rhizomes conical. Stalks green, numerous. Leaves
clear green, longish. Flowers large, well-formed, yellow, very much
spotted with bright nasturtium-colour. Very floriferous. This is the
finest Canna with spotted flowers. Height 5 ft. to 5½ ft.

=Canna elata-macrophylla.=--Stems reddish below, green and downy above,
more than 8 ft. high. Leaves light green, very large, oval, slightly
waved. Flowers salmon-coloured, small. Rootstocks conical, of medium
size. Seeds freely.

=Canna expansa.=--Stems thicker than in any other variety, green,
downy, 6 ft to over 8 ft. high. Leaves of enormous size (over 4 ft. long
and from 22 ins. to 2 ft. wide), oval, obtuse, spreading horizontally to
a great distance from the stems. Flowers small, vermilion shaded with
salmon, in panicles. Roots fibrous. Should be planted in a
well-sheltered position to save the huge leaves from being torn by the
winds. Never seeds.

=Canna expansa-rubra.=--Stems numerous, vigorous, very thick, dark-red,
4 ft. to nearly 6 ft. high. Leaves of a dark-red colour, and resembling
those of the preceding in size, shape, and arrangement. Flowers large,
with rounded divisions, of a dazzling purple colour. Rootstocks very
thick, cylindrical, and much swollen in the upper part. Like the
preceding, requires a sheltered position.

=Canna elongatissima-rustica.=--Stems deep-green, very thick, 6½ ft. to
over 8 ft. high. Leaves oval, erect, very large, of a deep shining
green, with a narrow dark-red margin. Flowers very small,
orange-rose-coloured. Rootstocks very small, conical, with fibrous
roots. A vigorous-growing variety.

=Canna excelsa-zebrina.=--Stems dark violet-red, downy, rather thick, 6½
ft. to over 8 ft. high. Leaves very large, oval, erect, deep-green,
passing into dark-red, rayed with violet-purple. Flowers small, orange.
Rootstocks small, conical. This is the finest striped variety.

=Canna guayaquilla.=--Rhizomes large, round. Stalks very thick, reddish.
Leaves very wide and large, bordered with purple. Flowers small,
yellowish-orange. Rather uncommon; fine habit; a remarkable kind. Height
over 6 ft.

=Canna gigantea-major.=--Stems thick and vigorous, of a light-green,
slightly reddish below, 6½ ft. to 8½ ft. high. Leaves very large, of a
light glistening green. Flowers, medium size, pale-red. Rootstocks
whitish, very thick, cylindrical, and swollen. A very hardy variety.

=Canna gigantea-rubra.=--Stems dark red, 4 ft. to nearly 6 ft. high.
Leaves broad, obtuse, green, shaded with dark-red. Flowers blood-red, in
panicles. Rootstocks conical, very closely crowded together. Resembles
_C. Chatei-grandis_, but is an inferior variety.

=Canna grandis.=--Stems green, downy, very thick, from nearly 10 ft. to
nearly 12 ft. high. Leaves oval, erect, deep green, very large. Flowers
poppy-red, small, but in large panicles. Rootstocks small, with fibrous
roots.

=Canna grandiflora-floribunda.=--Stems small, from 20 ins. to 3¼ ft.
high, of a light glistening green. Leaves small, light-green and
glistening. Flowers numerous, very large, with rounded divisions,
orange-rose colour, in handsome panicles. Rootstocks yellowish,
numerous, cylindrical, of medium size. A very hardy variety, of great
effect from its brilliant and luxuriant inflorescence.

=Canna Heliconiæfolia.=--Stems deep green and downy, 6½ ft. to over 8
ft. high. Leaves green, oval, erect, very firm. Flowers small, orange.
Roots fibrous. Does not seed before the second year.

=Canna Hostei.=--Stems chestnut-coloured, about 8 ft. high. Leaves
dark-red, lance-shaped. Flowers large, red. Rootstocks dark-red,
conical.

=Canna involventiafolia.=--Stems green, 8 ft. to nearly 10 ft. high.
Leaves very large, reflexed, of a light green. Flowers few and small.
Rootstocks small, with fibrous rootlets.

=Canna Imperator.=--Stems vigorous, very thick, green and downy, reddish
below, 6½ ft. to over 8 ft. at the close of the season. Leaves
half-opened, lance-shaped, light green, with prominent lateral nerve, 2
ft. 4 ins. long by 14 ins. wide. Flowers late, very effective, of a
dazzling blood-red. Rootstocks conical, very short.

=Canna iridiflora-hybrida.=--Stems green, downy, somewhat reddish below,
6½ ft. to over 8 ft. high. Leaves green, very large. Flowers
well-formed, very large, blood-red. Rootstocks small, with fibrous
roots. Flowers to most advantage in a house, where it is really
magnificent.

=Canna iridiflora-rubra.=--Stems brown, 3¼ ft. to nearly 5 ft. high.
Leaves deep green shaded with dark red, and with a narrow dark
purplish-red margin. Flowers large, purplish-red. This variety is not so
tender as the preceding one.

=Canna insignis.=--Stems violet, downy, 3¼ ft. to nearly 5 ft. high.
Leaves oval, extending horizontally, of a tender green, rayed and
margined with purplish-red. Flowers few and small, of an orange-red.
This variety is valuable for its fine foliage.

=Canna Joseph-Auzende.=--Stems green, 4½ ft. high. Leaves green and
flaccid. Flowers deep carmine, of medium size. Rootstocks yellowish,
small and conical. Not a very good variety.

=Canna Jean Bart.=--Rhizomes conical; stalks medium thickness, deep
green, elongated. Flowers very large, deep purple; height 5½ ft. to 6
ft.

=Canna Jean Vandael.=--Rhizomes cylindrical, longish; stalks medium
thickness, numerous, clear green. Leaves clear green, erect, elongated.
Flowers large, well-formed, garnet-red; height 4 ft. to 4½ ft.

=Canna Jussieu.=--Stems green, from nearly 4 ft. to 4¼ ft. high. Leaves
small, glaucous-green. Flowers citron, approaching a chamois-colour.
Rootstocks conical cylindrical. (An inferior variety.)

=Canna Krelagei discolor.=--Stems very thick, from nearly 5 ft. to
nearly 6 ft. high. Leaves broad and thick, dark-red, rayed with
purplish-red. Flowers large, carmine-red, sometimes rayed with white, in
handsome panicles. Rootstocks grey, conical.

=Canna Liervalii.=--Stems dark-red, 6½ ft. high. Leaves of the same
colour, rayed with purple. Flowers orange-red. Rootstocks dark red,
conical.

=Canna Lavallei.=--Stems slender, purplish-brown. Flowers very large,
well-formed, vermilion-orange, becoming yellower as they open.
Rootstocks cylindrical.

=Canna Lemoinei.=--Stems green, 6½ ft. to over 8 ft. high. Leaves very
leathery, of medium size, and deep green colour. Flowers bright orange.

=Canna limbata-major.=--Stems green and downy, 5 ft. to 6½ ft. high.
Leaves large, lance-shaped, narrow, spreading, deep green, 2½ ft. long,
and over 8 ins. wide. Flowers large, orange-red. Rootstocks cylindrical,
narrowed towards the top, closely crowded together. Ripens its seeds
freely.

=Canna maxima.=--Stems green and downy, 5 ft. to 6½ ft. high. Leaves
very large, lance-shaped, acute, light green, becoming darker in the
course of growth, reflexed, from 2½ ft. to 32 ins. long, and 10 ins. to
1 ft. wide, on stalks 6 or 7 ins. long. Flowers small, orange-yellow.
Roots fibrous, without rootstocks. Does not flower before the second
year, and is valuable only for its foliage.

=Canna Maréchal-Vaillant.=--Stems robust, from 5 ft. to 6 ft. high.
Leaves oblong, lance-shaped, erect, 28 ins. to 32 ins. long, deep green,
striped with purplish-red. Flowers large, elegant, of a pure orange, in
handsome spikes. Rootstocks rather thick, conical and cylindrical,
standing at some distance from the tuft.

=Canna musæfolia-peruviana.=--Stems green and downy, 5 ft. to 6½ ft.
high. Leaves very large, wide, light green. Flowers small, orange.
Rootstocks very small.

=Canna musæfolia minima.=--Leaves of a whitish green, badly set. Flowers
small, orange-brown. No rootstocks.

=Canna musæfolia-hybrida.=--Resembles _C. musæfolia_, but the stems and
leaves are thicker and of a deeper green.

=Canna musæfolia-rubra.=--Stems dark red, 6½ ft. high. Leaves dark
purple-red, oval, very large. Flowers small, salmon-red. Rootstocks very
tender, with fibrous roots. Neglected as too tender and not sufficiently
distinct from several other varieties, such as _C. Chatei-grandis_, etc.

=Canna musæfolia-perfecta.=--Stems from 5 ft. to 6½ ft. high. Leaves
broad, very firm, of a handsome whitish green. Flowers small, yellow.
Roots fibrous, without rootstocks.

=Canna metallica.=--Resembles _C. nigricans_, and has never justified
its name.

=Canna macrophylla-zebrina.=--Stems violet and downy, 4 ft. to over 5
ft. high. Leaves dark-red, rayed and striped with purple. Flowers red,
with a perennially withered aspect. Rootstocks very small, conical,
closely set round the tuft. This variety is very subject to diseases.

=Canna metallicoides.=--Stems violet, 5 ft. to 6½ ft. high. Leaves of
medium size, dark-red striped with purple. Flowers medium size,
light-red. Rootstocks small, with fibrous roots.

=Canna nervosa.=--Stems reddish, 3¼ ft. to 5 ft. high. Leaves deep
green, rayed and margined with purple. Flowers small, blood-red.
Rootstocks conical.

=Canna nigricans.=--Stems purplish-red, 4¼ ft. to over 8 ft. high.
Leaves lance-shaped, acuminate, erect, of a coppery red, which exhibits
a metallic gleam under sunshine. The old leaves lose their reddish tint,
and assume a duller hue. They are 2½ ft. in length by 10 ins. or 12 ins.
wide. Flowers few and late, of a sad, tawny-yellow colour. Rootstocks
brownish, conical. Seldom seeds. One of the finest kinds.

=Canna nana-superba.=--Stems green, growing very closely together, and
from 20 ins. to 32 ins. high. Leaves small, of a handsome green. Flowers
large, badly formed, of a brick-red, becoming darker as they open.
Rootstocks grey, small, conical (A very inferior variety.)

=Canna nepalensis-grandiflora.=--Has the same habit and foliage as the
type (_C. nepalensis_), but is a dwarfer variety with better-shaped
flowers of a sulphur-yellow, sometimes dotted with red.

=Canna Oriflamme.=--Rhizomes conical, stalks deep green. Leaves good
size, elongated, acuminate, deep green lightly striped. Flowers very
large, deep orange, in panicles which stand up considerably above the
foliage. Height 5 ft. to 5½ ft.

=Canna Pie IX.=--Stems small, green, slightly reddish below, 3¼ ft. to 4
ft. high. Leaves small, of a pale glaucous-green, erect, lance-shaped,
acuminate. Flowers large, light yellow with a deep orange claw, very
numerous, in closely-crowded panicles. Rootstocks conical and
cylindrical. Excellent for edgings.

=Canna Parmentier.=--Stems small, green, 4 ft. to 5 ft. high. Leaves
glaucous-green, small. Flowers brownish-yellow. Rootstocks grey, conical
and cylindrical. (An inferior variety.)

=Canna purpurea-hybrida.=--Stems dark-red, from 4½ ft. to over 5 ft.
high. Leaves dark-red, rayed with reddish-purple. Flowers large,
brownish-yellow. Rootstocks small, conical, crowded. A very handsome
variety, but tender.

=Canna Porteana.=--Stems small, dark-red, 3¼ ft. to 4 ft. high. Leaves
red, with a metallic lustre. Flowers medium-sized, light orange.
Rootstocks grey, small, forming a close, compact tuft. A fine but tender
variety.

=Canna picturata-fastuosa.=--Stems numerous, green, 5 ft. to 6½ ft.
high. Leaves green, glaucescent, narrow, much pointed, over 2 ft. long
by 6 ins. wide. Flowers large, well-opened, light yellow speckled with
red. Blooms luxuriantly and continuously from the end of July to the
first frosts. Rootstocks white, with grey scales, cylindrical, much
elongated.

=Canna picturata-nana.=--Stems small, green, from 20 ins. to 2 ft.
high. Leaves very small, of a light green. Flowers large, yellow,
spotted with red. Rootstocks whitish, small, conical. A charming variety
for edgings.

=Canna Plantieri.=--Stems very thick, reddish below, deep green above,
3¼ ft. to over 8 ft. high. Leaves green, glaucous, lance-shaped, acute.
Flowers large, bright yellow, changing to orange. Rootstocks greyish,
rather thick, conical and cylindrical. A late and shy bloomer.

=Canna Prémices-de-Nice.=--Stems and leaves like those of _C. Annei_, 3¼
ft. to 5 ft. high. Flowers very large, bright yellow, sometimes dotted
with salmon-colour. Rootstocks conical and cylindrical, rather shorter
than those of _C. Annei_. A very free-flowering and hardy variety.

=Canna rubra-superbissima.=--Stems dark purple-red, very thick, from
nearly 6 ft. to 6½ ft. high. Leaves broad, round, purplish-red, with a
metallic lustre. Flowers of medium size, light orange-red. Rootstocks
brownish, very thick, conical, crowded together. One of the finest
metallic-red-leaved Cannas.

=Canna rubricaulis.=--Stems dark-red, from nearly 6 ft. to 7½ ft. high.
Leaves dark-red, rayed and margined with purple-red. Rootstocks greyish,
small, conical. (Inferior to the preceding variety.)

=Canna rubra-nerva.=--Stems dark-red, from 3½ ft. to 5 ft. high. Leaves
long and narrow, lance-shaped, reflexed, dark-red rayed with purple.
Flowers large, of a cinnabar red. Rootstocks dark-red, very long,
conical, and cylindrical. Resembles a weeping willow.

=Canna rubra-perfecta.=--Stems dark-red, from 5 ft. to 6½ ft. high.
Leaves dark-red, rayed with purple. Flowers of medium size, orange-red.
Rootstocks dark-red, conical. Seeds freely.

=Canna rotundifolia-vera.=--Stems very thick, green, downy below, from
3¼ ft. to 5 ft. high. Leaves round, reflexed, of a deep glistening
green. Flowers medium-sized, opening very badly, of a carmine-red.
Rootstocks medium-sized, conical. (A tender variety.)

=Canna rotundifolia-rubra-major.=--Stems dark-red, numerous, very thick,
vigorous, from 3¼ ft. to 5¼ ft. high. Leaves round, obtuse, spreading
almost horizontally, pale-red, with a dark purplish-red midrib and
border. Rootstocks dark-red, very thick, cylindrical, much swollen
above.

=Canna rotundifolia-metallica.=--Similar to the preceding, but with
coppery-red leaves which have a metallic lustre.

=Canna Rendatleri.=--Stems light purplish-red, of medium thickness,
vigorous, rather distant from each other, from nearly 6 ft. to over 8
ft. high. Leaves much pointed, deep-green tinged with dark-red, badly
set. Flowers numerous, very large, well-opened, salmon-red. Rootstocks
greyish, conical, cylindrical. Ripens its seeds badly.

=Canna Rodezii.=--Stems small, numerous, from 4 ft. to 6¼ ft. high.
Leaves green, glaucous, lanceolate, acute, very narrow. Flowers large,
marigold-orange. Rootstocks whitish, cylindrical, very slender and long.
A variety desirable for its flowers, but not ornamental in foliage.

=Canna Thibauti.=--Stems purplish-brown, from 5 ft. to 6½ ft. high.
Leaves broad, thick, dark-red, rayed with purple. Flowers very large,
well-opened, poppy-red, in crowded panicles. Rootstocks white, small,
crowded together.

=Canna striata.=--Stems green, slender, 3¼ ft. to 5 ft. high. Leaves
small, very narrow, erect, glaucous-green. Flowers yellow, speckled and
rayed with red. Rootstocks small, cylindrical, crowded at the base of
the plant. Inferior to _C. picturata-nana_ of the same colour.

=Canna Warscewiczioides-Chatei.=--Stems dark-red, thick, from 6½ ft. to
over 7 ft. high. Leaves very large, dark-red. Flowers small, blood-red,
in very large panicles. Rootstocks brown, rather thick, cylindrical.

=Canna Warscewiczioides-nobilis.=--Stems deep-green, tinged with
dark-red, from 5 ft. to 6½ ft. high. Leaves deep-green, rayed and
margined with dark-red. Rootstocks medium-sized, conical, crowded around
the base of the plant.

=Canna Van-Houttei.=--Stems dark-red, vigorous, from 5 ft. to 6½ ft.
high. Leaves lance-shaped, pointed, green, rayed and margined with dark
purplish-red, 2 ft. to 2½ ft. long. Flowers large, well-formed,
poppy-red. Rootstocks grey, long, cylindrical. A very handsome and hardy
variety.

=Canna zebrina.=--Stems green, tinged with dark-red, small, from 32 ins.
to 3¼ ft. high. Leaves deep-green, rayed and striped with dark-red.
Flowers small, orange tinged with salmon. Rootstocks whitish, conical. A
tardy grower.

=Canna zebrina-major.=--Stems green tinged with dark-red, downy, of
medium size, 5 ft. to 6½ ft. high. Leaves oval, erect, deep-green,
rayed and striped with dark purplish-red. Flowers very small, red.
Rootstocks brown, rather thick, conical, swollen.

=Canna zebrina-elegantissima.=--Stems dark-red, vigorous, 4 ft, to 5 ft.
high. Leaves very large, lance-shaped, deep-green, striped with dark
purplish-red. Flowers of medium size, yellowish-brown tinged with
scarlet. Rootstocks greyish, conical, swollen.

=Canna zebrina-géant.=--Stems deep-green, tinged with violet-red, very
thick, downy. Leaves very large, thick, deep-green, rayed with dark-red.
Flowers large, light-red. Rootstocks whitish, conical, closely crowded
together. Difficult to flower, but very ornamental in foliage.

=Canna zebrina-violacea.=--Stems violet, downy, slender, about 4 ft.
high. Leaves violet, rayed with purple. Flowers of medium size,
bright-red. Roots fibrous. A very tender variety, with badly-developed
leaves.

=Canna zebrina-nana.=--Stems green tinged with dark-red, 16 ins. to 20
ins. high. Leaves small, light-green, rayed and margined with purple.
Flowers of medium size, light-red. Rootstocks small, crowded on one
another. Excellent for large edgings.

=Canna Ferrandii.=--Stems dark purplish-red, 4 ft. to 5 ft. high. Leaves
medium-sized, dark-red, margined with purple. Flowers large, blood-red,
very numerous, in handsome panicles.

=Canna Auguste Ferrier.=--Stems green, very thick, downy, nearly 10 ft.
high. Leaves very large, oval, erect, pointed, deep-green, with narrow
stripes and margin of dark purplish-red. Flowers of medium size,
orange-red. Rootstocks small, but very hardy. A shy bloomer, but of
remarkably fine habit and foliage.

=Canna Barilletti.=--Stems red, vigorous, nearly 10 ft. high. Leaves
very large, deep-red. Flowers small, orange-red. Rootstocks very small,
conical, with fibrous roots.

The number of Cannas enumerated is so large that it is desirable to make
a selection from them. A still narrower selection is indicated by
asterisks.


A SELECTION OF CANNAS.

  C. Annei
       “  -discolor
     atronigricans
     atropurpurea
    *Auguste Ferrier
     aurantiaca-splendida
     aurantiaca-zebrina
    *Amelia
     Barilletti
     Bihorelli
     Bonetti
    *Chatei-discolor
       “   -grandis
     Député Hénon
     discolor
    *excelsa-zebrina
     expansa
        “   -rubra
  C. *elegantissima rustica
      Ferrandii
      gigantea
      grandiflora-floribunda
      iridiflora
          “     -hybrida
          “     -rubra
      insignis
     *Imperator
     *Krelagei discolor
      Lavallei
      Liliiflora
      limbata
      macrophylla
      musæfolia
      maxima
      Maréchal-Vaillant
     *nigricans
  C. peruviana purpurea
         “     robusta
    *purpurea spectabilis
    *Porteana
    *picturata-fastuosa
         “    -nana
     Pie IX.
     Prémices-de-Nice
     Rendatleri
     rotundifolia-metallica
          “      -rubra
     Thibauti
     Van-Houttei
     zebrina-nana
        “   -elegantissima

=*Cannabis sativus= (_Hemp-plant_).--A well-known annual, native of
India and Persia, and largely cultivated in Europe for the sake of its
fibre. In ordinary situations it grows from 4 ft. to 10 ft. high, but in
Italy, under very favourable circumstances, it sometimes grows as high
as 20 ft. In plants growing singly the stem is frequently much branched,
but when grown in masses it is generally straight and unbranched. The
leaves are long-stalked, and composed of from five to seven long,
lance-shaped, sharp-pointed leaflets, radiating from the top of the
stalk, and with the margins cut into sharp saw-like teeth. This
well-known plant is useful where the tenderer subtropical plants cannot
be enjoyed. Single well-grown plants of it look very imposing and
distinct, and are good for the backs of borders or mixed groups. For
these purposes, it should be sown early in April in the open ground. To
get large plants it would no doubt be worth while raising it in frames.
It loves a warm, sandy loam.

=*Carduuse riophorus= (_Woolly-headed Thistle_).--A remarkably
conspicuous native plant, with a much-branched, furrowed, hairy stem 3
ft. to 5 ft. high, and very deeply cut and undulated spiny leaves, the
lower ones often 2 ft. long. The flower-heads are very large, of a
purplish-red colour, and surrounded on the under side with a dense white
cottony web. There are few plants more handsome or novel in appearance
than an established one of this. It is suitable for borders, or groups
of hardy fine-foliaged plants, and grows well in any ordinary
garden-soil. Seed.

=*Carex paniculata.=--A very large sedge, growing somewhat like a dwarf
tree-fern, with strong and thick stems, and with luxuriant masses of
drooping leaves. The roots form dense elevated tufts, frequently
elevated from one to three feet above the surface of the ground; and
when the plant is in flower, it generally exhibits a large and
spreading panicle. The leaves are rough and broad, and the flower-spike
from 3 ins. to 6 ins. long. A few tufts of this are very effective on
the margins of water near groups of picturesque plants. The finer
specimens are of great age, and must be procured from the bogs where the
plant occurs wild.

=*Carex pendula.=--A very handsome plant, unlike any of the other
British Carices, growing in large round tufts, with numerous
flowering-stems and barren shoots, which attain a height of from 3 ft.
to 6 ft. The leaves are often 2 ft. or more in length, and are chiefly
at the base of the plant. It is most attractive when in flower, from the
graceful disposition of its pendent spikes, which are usually about
half-a-dozen in number, and each from 4 ins. to 7 ins. in length. Very
suitable for the margin of water or for boggy or moist spots.

[Illustration: Carlina acaulis.]

=*Carlina acaulis.=--A hardy perennial, rather interesting from its
foliage, which has some resemblance to the leaves of a miniature
Acanthus, and is disposed in a broad, handsome, regular rosette very
close to the ground. Its single yellowish flower, 3 ins. or more across,
is borne on a very short, erect stalk in the centre of the rosette.
Although too dwarf for association with plants of more imposing stature,
it is well worthy of a place on a bank or slope, or on the margins of
low beds or groups, where its pleasing aspect and very distinct habit
will be

[Illustration: CARYOTA SOBOLIFERA.

Tender Palm; for summer use in the southern counties only.]

seen to best advantage. It thrives best in dry, stony, calcareous soil,
and is easily multiplied by sowing. In the mountainous districts of
France the flowers are gathered by the inhabitants, and used as a
substitute for artichokes. Central Europe.

=Carludovica palmata.=--A very ornamental, palm-like plant, from 4 ft.
to 7 ft. high, with rich dark-green leaves from 2 ft. to 3 ft. broad,
and divided into four lobes, each of which is again divided at the apex
into narrow segments. The leaf-stalks are round, smooth, and without
spines, and are of the same colour as the leaves. This interesting plant
will stand the open air in summer, from early June till October, but
requires warm house treatment in winter, with plenty of water at all
times. Seed. Peru and New Granada.

=Caryota sobolifera.=--An elegant Palm, with a slender stem and shining
light-green bipinnate leaves. The leaf-stalks, when young, are clothed
with a short, black, scaly tomentum, which falls off as the plant grows
older. It is often confounded with _C. urens_, but may be easily
distinguished from it by the suckers which it produces very freely from
its base. Similar treatment and uses to those given for _C. urens_, with
which it is of much the same value for the open garden. Malacca.

=Caryota urens.=--An East Indian Palm, with a stout stem, and an elegant
crown of spreading bipinnate leaves, from 3 ft. to 12 ft., or more, in
length, of a dark-green colour, the leaflets being 6 ins. to 9 ins. long
by 2 ins. to 4 ins. wide. When young, it should be potted in equal parts
of loam and vegetable mould, with a little sand; the pot to be well
drained, and water given liberally during the growing season. It is
generally seen in a small state in this country; and though it stands
the open air in summer, from June till the end of September, pretty
well, it can never be of much importance for our open-air gardening.

=*Cassia marilandica.=--A hardy, graceful perennial, 3½ ft. to 5 ft.
high, with pinnate leaves, resembling those of the Acacia, and slender
stems, bearing yellow flowers, in numerous small clusters in autumn. It
is somewhat late in growth, but once commenced, grows with great
rapidity. It thrives best in a position with a south aspect, and may be
multiplied either by division in spring, or by sowing from April to
June. It should always be planted in a warm, deep, sandy loam, and is
very suitable for borders or association in groups with the finer hardy
subjects, its graceful leaves qualifying it for a place in a group of
hardy foliage-plants. In naturally warm, deep, and well-drained soils it
will prove a noble subject for the back parts of borders. N. America.

=*Centaurea babylonica.=--Among the Centaureas there are a few subjects
which might be used among hardy fine-leaved plants, but by far the most
distinct and remarkable is the very silvery-leaved _C. babylonica_. This
is quite hardy, and when planted in good ground, sends up strong shoots,
clad with yellow flowers, to a height of 10 ft. or 12 ft. The bloom,
which continues from July to September, is not by any means so
attractive as the leaves; but the plant is at all times picturesque. In
groups, or, still better, isolated, on rough or undulating parts of
pleasure-grounds, it has a very fine effect. A free sandy loam suits it
best. Seed. Levant.

[Illustration: CENTAUREA BABYLONICA.

Coarse herbaceous Section; for isolation by wood-walks, etc.]

=Centaurea Clementei.=--A plant of robust growth (resembling _C.
ragusina_, but much larger in every part), with broad crowns of leaves,
which are deeply serrated and cut into lobes. To the elegance of the
foliage must be added its beauty of colouring, the leaf in a young state
being covered with down as white as snow, and when fully matured and
developed still retaining a silvery appearance. This plant, which I
first saw in M. Boissier’s garden, near Lausanne, I have no experience
of as a hardy plant in this country; but whatever its value in this
respect may be, there can be no doubt that for the summer garden it will
prove as effective as either _C. gymnocarpa_ or _C. ragusina_, both
exceptionally fine and useful plants. The same treatment will suit it.

=Centaurea dealbata= is a dwarf hardy species from the Caucasus, with
elegant foliage, white underneath, and rosy flowers: suitable among
dwarf hardy subjects.

=Centaurea gymnocarpa.=--A half-shrubby plant from the South of Europe,
nearly 2 ft. high, with hard, branching, bushy stems, and elegantly cut,
arching leaves, which are covered with a short, whitish-satiny down. A
variety (_C. plumosa_) has the leaves much more divided, and not so
white. This plant is somewhat hardier than _C. ragusina_, but both
require greenhouse treatment in winter. Same soil, positions, and
treatment as for _C. ragusina_. Useful as this is as an edging or
bedding plant, it is when grown as fine single specimens that its beauty
is most seen.

=Centaurea ragusina.=--This fine and distinct plant, which has lately
become one of the most popular of our flower-garden ornaments, cannot
be passed by in a book on fine-leaved plants. It is so abundantly used
as a bedding and ribbon-plant, etc., that nothing need be said of it in
these respects, but it will be seen to great advantage in single,
well-grown tufts or small groups, as its silvery leaves would contrast
finely with many of the dark green and glossy things recommended for
this purpose. Readily increased by seeds, or by cuttings. Should be
planted out in May. S. Europe.

=Chamædorea.=--A family of Mexican palms, with smooth, fine green stems,
resembling those of the bamboos, seldom more than 15 ft. or 20 ft. high
and 1 in. or 2 ins. thick, surmounted by tufts of eight or nine pinnate
or almost entire leaves, nearly 8 ft. in length. Among the most
ornamental species are _C. elatior_, _C. elegans_, and _C.
Ernesti-Augusti_. These elegant palms may, with advantage, be placed in
the open air in early summer, in sunny but sheltered nooks, and taken in
at the end of September. Their small, elegant heads particularly fit
them for placing here and there among groups of medium-sized,
fine-leaved plants, or among mixed masses of dahlias, cannas, etc.

=*Chamæpeuce diacantha.=--A spiny-leaved biennial of remarkable habit,
growing in tufts of six or eight stems, from 2 ft. to nearly 3 ft. high,
which, in the following season, are terminated by dense, spike-like
clusters of purplish blooms. It requires light, well-drained soil and a
warm position, and should seldom be watered. As the stems are not
produced until the second year, the radical rosettes of the first year
may be advantageously used in forming edgings, or on the margins of
groups, for which

[Illustration: CHAMÆDOREA.

Slender Palm Type; for placing amidst groups of dwarfer subjects during
the summer months.]

their light-green, silver-veined leaves are very suitable, or they may
serve to fill a vacant space in the mixed border. Multiplied by sowing
in spring or autumn. The plants require the shelter of a house in
winter, and are only effective for edgings in the young or rosette
stage.

=*Chamærops excelsa.=--A hardy species, with an erect stem, 20 ft. or 30
ft. high in its native country, and dark-green, erect, fan-shaped
leaves, deeply cut into narrow segments. The leaf-stalks are from 3 ft.
to 6 ft. long, and are enclosed at the base in a dense mass of rough
fibres, and armed at the edges with small, tooth-like spines. This plant
remains out during the winter in the neighbourhood of Paris, in
sheltered positions, the stem being protected in severe frosts with a
covering of straw, etc., and it is worth a trial in the south with us.

=*Chamærops Fortunei= (_The Chusan Palm_).--This species is often
confounded with _C. excelsa_, from which, however, it differs in being
of a stouter habit, having a more profuse matted network of fibres
around the bases of the leaves and crown, the segments of the leaves
much broader, and the leaf-stalks shorter and stouter, from 1 ft. to 2
ft. long, and quite unarmed. It grows 12 ft. or more in height, and has
a handsome, spreading head of fan-like leaves, which are slit into
segments about half-way down.

It may not be generally known that this palm is perfectly hardy in this
country. A plant of it in Her Majesty’s gardens at Osborne has stood out
for many winters and attained a considerable height. It is also placed
out at Kew, though protected in winter. On the water-side of the high
mound in the Royal Botanic Gardens, Regent’s Park, it is in even better
health than at Kew, though it has not had any protection for years, and
stood the fearfully hard frost of 1860. If small plants of this are
procured, it is better to grow them on freely for a year or two in the
greenhouse, and then turn them out in April, spreading the roots a
little and giving them a deep loamy soil. Plant in a sheltered place, so
that the leaves may not be injured by winds when they grow up and get
large. A gentle hollow, or among shrubs on the sides of some sheltered
glade, will prove the best place for it. The establishment of a palm
among our somewhat monotonous shrubbery and garden vegetation is surely
worthy of a little trouble, and the precautions indicated will prove
quite sufficient.

=Chamærops Palmetto= (_Palmetto Palm_).--This is a rather slow-growing
species, but valuable on account of its hardiness. It grows to a height
of about 15 ft., and has glaucous or sea-green, fan-shaped leaves,
divided into long narrow segments. The stem is smooth or without
prickles. It is a very fine object when planted out; and, grown in tubs
in a cool house or conservatory, stands the open air in summer well, and
should be put out at the end of May.

=*Chenopodium Atriplicis.=--A vigorous-growing Chinese annual, with an
angular, erect, slightly branched, reddish stem, over 3 ft. in height,
the young shoots and leaves covered with a fine rosy violet powder. The
leaves are very numerous, nearly spoon-shaped, and long-stalked. This
plant is very ornamental in foliage, and well adapted for planting on
grass-plats or grouping with

[Illustration: CHAMÆROPS EXCELSA.

Hardy Palm: best in sheltered positions.]

other plants in pleasure-grounds. May be treated as a half-hardy annual.

=Cineraria maritima.=--A very handsome bushy perennial, with finely-cut
leaves, covered on the under side with a silvery down. It bears numerous
heads of bright yellow flowers in summer. When the effect of its foliage
only is desired, the flowering-stems should be pinched off on their
first appearance. The plant then becomes more leafy and more branching.
Multiplied easily by seeds. Useful on the margins of shrubberies, or
isolated on banks, or on the grass of the pleasure-ground, where it
would form an agreeable variety among the _Acanthuses_ and various other
dark-green subjects recommended for this purpose.

=Cineraria Acanthifolia= is a fine variety of the preceding, and well
worthy of cultivation.

=Cladium Mariscus.=--This vigorous native fen-plant grows from 2 ft. to
6 ft. high, and, when in flower, is crowned with dense, close,
chestnut-coloured panicles, which are sometimes 3 ft. in length. The
radical leaves are glaucous, rigid, and often 4 ft. long. Worthy of a
place near such subjects as _Carex pendula_ or the _Typhas_ on the
margin of water.

=Colea Commersonii.=--A shrub from Madagascar, with very large opposite
leaves, each consisting of pairs of oval-obtuse leaflets. This has been
used in the subtropical garden at Battersea Park, but it is not likely
to be of any practical importance in our outdoor gardening. Indeed it
must be a very fine plant in this way which would produce so good an
effect as young plants of _Ailantus glandulosa_.

=*Comptonia asplenifolia.=--This is a quaint-looking little shrub,
fern-like in leaf and neat in habit. The leaves are long, and cut into
numerous rounded lobes, somewhat like those of the _Ceterach_; and the
habit of the shrub is spreading and pleasing. It likes peaty soil, and
may be increased by layers, suckers, or seeds. It should be used as an
isolated specimen on the grass, or associated with such things as the
oak-leaved _Hydrangea_ and _Aralia japonica_. A very pretty object in
the woods of New Jersey and many other parts of N. America, where it is
called the Sweet Fern. It would be peculiarly appropriate for similar
positions in this country, when we have it plentiful enough to
naturalise.

=Cordyline indivisa.=--A magnificent New Zealand plant, with a simple
stem, from 2 ft. to 5 ft. high, and well distinguished by its
excessively thick and leathery leaves, which are from 1 ft. to 5 ft.
long, and 4 or 5 inches broad, lance-shaped, of a dark shining green
colour, the midrib and veins being of a rich deep orange. The flowers
are white, and very densely crowded, in a large drooping panicle. This
fine greenhouse plant may be placed out of doors in summer, from the end
of May till October, with a very good effect; best, perhaps, as an
isolated specimen, the pot being sunk in the grass.

=Corypha australis.=--A noble Australian palm, over 30 ft. high in its
native country, and forming a very effective subject for the subtropical
garden in summer, from June till October. The leaves are nearly
circular, often more than 5 ft. broad, of a dark green colour, very much
plaited, and divided round the edge into narrow segments, and supported
by spiny leaf-stalks, from 6½ ft. to nearly 10 ft. long. It requires
abundance of water, and should have a warm, sunny, and sheltered
position. Few places, however, can afford to have subjects of this
character in the open air, except where there are large conservatories,
in which it is a relief to get more room in summer.

=*Crambe cordifolia.=--This is unquestionably one of the finest of
perfectly hardy and large-leaved herbaceous plants. It is as easily
grown as the common Seakale--more easily, if anything; and in heavy rich
ground makes a splendid head of leaves, surmounted in summer by a dense
spray of very small flowers. In planting it, the deeper and richer the
soil the finer the result. It will prove a capital thing for any group
of fine-leaved hardy plants, and may also be planted wherever a bold
though low type of vegetation is desired.

There is another species, _*C. juncea_, a dwarf kind, with white flowers
and much-branched stems, the ramifications of which are very slender and
elegant. This is also effective, but not so valuable as _C. cordifolia_.

=*Cucurbita perennis.=--A climbing or trailing plant, well adapted for
covering walls, ruins, trellises, steep slopes, etc. It is a very
vigorous grower, its stems sometimes attaining a length of nearly 40 ft.
in one year; but it will probably never do this in our climate. The
leaves are strong, rough, and of a glaucous colour; and the shoots run
about freely if the plant be in very rich soil. Where a bold trailing
plant for high trellis-work, or rough banks, or shaggy rockwork is
desired, it will be found useful; but withal we cannot give it a place
in the front rank, and the small select garden without any of the
above-mentioned appendages will certainly be better without it. For the
botanical garden and curious collections it is indispensable. It is
strong and lasting when well established, and may be allowed to trail
over rough places, stumps, or similar positions. The flowers have a
rather strong odour of violets, and are succeeded by roundish fruit, the
size of a small orange, of a deep green colour barred and speckled with
white. Requires a deep, light soil, and a warm but airy position.
Seedlings and plants in exposed places should be covered in winter with
litter or leaves. It is easily multiplied in spring by division of the
young tuberous stems, or by sowing in light, substantial, well-drained
soil from April to July, or in pots in a lukewarm hotbed in March and
April. It has not, so far as I am aware, fruited in our climate.

=Cyathea dealbata.=--This very handsome fern, known in N. Zealand as the
Silver Tree-fern, has a slender, branched, almost black stem, 4 ft. to 8
ft. high, ending in a fine crown of broadly-oblong twice-divided fronds
of a dark green colour above and milk-white below; the rachis and
midribs when young are covered with brown scales, and afterwards with
pale deciduous down. This plant may be placed in the open air, in the
southern and milder districts, during the summer months from the end of
May till the end of September.

=Cycas revoluta.=--A graceful and well-known plant, with a very stout
stem, sometimes, though rarely, reaching a height of from 6 ft. to 10
ft. from the top of which issues a beautiful crown of dark green
pinnate

[Illustration: CYCAS (_very large and old specimen_).

Stove Section: suitable for placing in the open air, in warm and
sheltered parts of the country, after a strong growth has been made and
matured indoors.]

leaves, from 2 ft. to 6 ft. long. It is one of the most valuable of the
greenhouse plants that may be placed in the open air in summer from the
end of May till October, and is particularly graceful in the centre of a
bed of flowering plants, or isolated with the pot or tub plunged to the
rim in the turf, always in a warm and sheltered position. Increased by
seeds, or by separation of the suckers which are occasionally thrown up.

=*Cynara Scolymus= (_French Artichoke_).--This plant, although chiefly
grown for culinary purposes, possesses sufficient merit as a
foliage-plant to entitle it to a place amongst ornamental subjects. Its
long, deeply-divided leaves, white and downy beneath, its height (4 ft.
to 5 ft.), its purplish flower-heads, and distinct habit render it very
suitable for planting on the irregular and rougher parts of
pleasure-grounds, grass-plats, etc., which are often occupied by
subjects far less striking.

=*Cyperus longus= (_Galingale_).--The stiff, erect, tapering, triangular
stem of this plant, which is from 2 ft. to 3 ft. high, is crowned by a
handsome loose umbellate panicle of chestnut-coloured flower-spikes, at
the base of which there is an involucrum of three or more unequal
leaves. These are often 1 or 2 feet long, the lower ones arching
gracefully and of a bright shining green, giving the plant a very
distinct and pleasing appearance. The rootstock is thick and aromatic,
and was formerly much used in medicine as a tonic. A rare native plant,
suitable for the bog-bed or the margin of water.

=Dahlia imperialis= (_Lily-flowered Dahlia_).--The common Dahlia gives
us no more idea of this than the little vernal Scilla of Britain does of
_Scilla peruviana_. The Imperial Dahlia has very large and graceful,
much divided leaves, and flowers of a pure and beautiful French white,
thrown up in a great cone-like mass, and resembling such lilies as _L.
tigrinum Fortunei_, which, instead of merely developing a head of
flowers, shoot up a great candelabrum laden with them. The flowers of
this dahlia do not, like most of the flowers of composite plants, open
so wide as to stare at you with the brazen look of a sunflower, but, on
the contrary, hang pendulous and half open, with some of the modesty of
the white lily. There is little chance of this species producing its
flowers in the open air in this country, but it will, notwithstanding,
be of service both in the flower-garden and conservatory.

Planted in rich soil, and placed in a warm, sheltered position in the
open air at the end of May, it grows well with us in summer, and, in
consequence of its large and graceful leaves, is an ornament worthy of
being used as a “fine-foliaged” or “subtropical” plant. Just at the time
that it begins to gather together its flowering energies the best of our
season fails, and the plant must soon fail too, if not immediately taken
up and placed in a well-lighted and warm greenhouse. If plunged out in a
large pot or tub during the summer, it may be taken up without injury,
and will in all probability flower under glass in the autumn, and prove
a magnificent ornament. We should have very small hopes of its flowering
well if planted out so that its great roots must be mutilated when being
taken up, and therefore the safe way will be to pot it in a very large
pot, and plunge that in the ground. The roots would probably go through
the pot and enter the ground, but the main mass of them could be taken
up without disturbance,

[Illustration: TREE FERN.

For half-shady sheltered dells, in warmer and milder districts, during
the summer months.]

and then it could if necessary be shifted into a larger pot or small
tub.

=*Datisca cannabina.=--A distinct and gracefully-habited herbaceous
plant from 4 ft. to 6 ft. high. The long stems are clothed with large
and handsome pinnate leaves, and the yellowish-green inflorescence
appears towards the end of summer. The male plant has long been known as
a very strong, graceful, and effective herb. The female plant, however,
remains green much longer than the male, and when profusely laden with
fruit, each shoot droops and the whole plant improves in aspect. It
should not be forgotten in any selection of hardy plants of free growth
and imposing aspect. From seed will probably be found the best way to
raise it, and then one would be pretty sure of securing plants of both
sexes.

=Dicksonia antarctica.=--A very noble evergreen tree-fern, with a stout
trunk, which varies considerably in thickness, and attains a height of
30 ft. or more. The fronds, which form a magnificent crown 20 ft. or 30
ft. across, are lance-shaped, much divided, of a shining dark green on
the upper surface, and paler underneath, from 6 ft. to 20 ft. long,
beautifully arched, and becoming pendulous with age. Perhaps the
hardiest of tree-ferns, and therefore most suitable for placing in the
open air in summer in sheltered shady dells, from the middle of May to
the beginning of October.

=*Dicentra (Dielytra) eximia.=--A plant with dense and very graceful
foliage, far more so than any other member of the order in cultivation;
and valuable as a flowering plant too, as the brightly-coloured flowers
remain on for a long time in spring and early summer. It generally grows
from 12 ins. to 16 ins. high, forming thick, almost pyramidal, tufts of
pale green, glaucescent, deeply-divided leaves, and bearing handsome
drooping clusters of large, rose-coloured flowers, often flowering twice
in the year. Although not absolutely necessary, it will be all the
better to plant it in light soil. Multiplied by division of the tufts in
spring. It should be associated with dwarf subjects like _Thalictrum
minus_, or be used on the margins of mixed beds of fine-leaved hardy
plants.

=*Dimorphanthus mandschuricus.=--A magnificent hardy shrub of erect
habit, with very large, much-divided, spiny leaves, which very much
resemble those of the Angelica-tree of North America, and in this
country attaining a height of 6 ft. to 10 ft., which it will probably
much exceed when well established in favourable positions. It is
certainly the most remarkable fine-foliage shrub that has been
introduced into our gardens for years, and is therefore of the highest
importance for the subtropical garden. As to its treatment, it seems to
thrive with the greatest vigour in a well-drained deep loam, and would
grow well in ordinary garden soil. As to position, isolation in some
sheltered but sunny spot will show it to great advantage; but it may
also be grouped with like subjects, always allowing space for the spread
of its great leaves.

=*Dipsacus sylvestris.=--A rather singular-looking hardy native plant, 5
ft. to 6 ft. high, with a prickly, leafy, branching stem, and longish
opposite leaves joined together at their bases. The flowers are of a
pretty purplish rose-colour, and are borne in conical heads 3 ins.

[Illustration: DIMORPHANTHUS MANDSCHURICUS.

Hardy deciduous shrub Section.]

or more in length. Suited for the embellishment of rough, uneven ground,
and will grow well in almost any kind of soil. Still more desirable than
the foregoing is _D. laciniatus_; a native of France, the leaves of
which are fringed with silky hairs instead of spines, and which has
always whitish flowers. Both these plants are biennials, and are easily
raised from seed.


THE DRACÆNAS.

Long as this noble family has been known in our gardens, we have yet to
learn a great deal about its use and beauty. Hitherto only allowed to
grace a stove or conservatory now and then, the Dracænas in future will
be among the indispensable ornaments of every garden where grace or
variety is sought. They are among the very best of those subjects which
may be brought from the conservatory or greenhouse in early summer, and
placed in the flower-garden till it is time to take them in again to the
houses in which they are to pass the winter months. And if it were not
necessary to protect them through the winter, it would be almost worth
our while to bring them indoors at that season, so graceful are they,
and so useful for adding the highest character to our conservatories.
The hardier and most coriaceous kinds, like _indivisa_ and _Draco_, may
be placed out with impunity very far north. The brightly coloured kinds,
like _D. terminalis_, have been tried in the open air at Battersea, but
not with success. It would be dangerous to try them in the open air much
farther north, except in very favourable spots. The better kinds are
indicated in the select list of subtropical plants. _D. indivisa_ grows
well in the open air in the south of England and Ireland.

=Dracæna australis.=--A fine plant, with a stout, branched stem, from 10
ft. to 40 ft. high; and oblong, lance-shaped, bright green leaves, from
2 ft. to 3 ft. in length and 2 ins. to 4 ins. in breadth, striated with
numerous parallel veins. Flowers white, densely crowded, sweet-scented,
¾ in. across; but these are rarely produced except in large houses in
botanic or other gardens, where there are old or well-established
specimens. This is a useful conservatory species, and may be used out of
doors in summer, like _D. indivisa_, though it is not quite so graceful.
This plant is of very easy culture in ordinary soil.

=Dracæna cannæfolia.=--A very fine species from New Holland, with a tall
stem, and leaves from 20 ins. to 2 ft. long, the sides of which are
rolled inwards, so as to form a kind of pipe, of a fine sea-green
colour, and supported on stalks a foot or more in length. This is a
valuable species for warm greenhouse or conservatory use, and also for
placing out of doors in the southern counties, though it thrives best
indoors.

=Dracæna Draco= (_Dragon tree of Teneriffe_).--A large and vigorous
species, native of the Canary Islands, where it attains a great height
and age; the now perished Dragon-tree at Orotava in Teneriffe having
grown, according to Meyen, “70 ft. high and 48 ft. in circumference,
with an antiquity which must at least be greater than that of the
Pyramids.” In this country it is seldom seen more than 10 ft. high. The
stem is tree-like, simple or divided at the top, and often, when old,
becoming much branched, each branch terminated by a crowded head of
lanceolate-linear entire leaves of a glaucous green colour. The flowers
form a large terminal panicle, and are individually small and of a
greenish-white colour. This plant is more graceful and effective when in
a young state, in which it usually occurs in our gardens, than when old
and branched. It thrives well in the greenhouse or conservatory, and in
the midland and southern counties may be placed in the open air from the
end of May to October, while it is a fine object indoors at all seasons.
It is of very easy culture in sandy loam, and requires plenty of pot
room.

=*Dracæna indivisa.=--A very graceful plant, with leaves from 2 ft. to 4
ft. long, and 1 in. to 2 ins. in breadth, tapering to a point, pendent,
and dark green. It should not be confounded with the conservatory plant
known as _Cordyline indivisa_, which is too tender to succeed well in
the open air, and somewhat difficult to grow. This species, on the
contrary, is perfectly hardy in the south of England and Ireland. I saw
good specimens of it at Bicton a few years ago, and quite recently as
far north as Woodstock, in the county Kilkenny, in Ireland; a plant also
stood out in a vase for several years in Mr. A. M’Kenzie’s garden at
Muswell Hill, N. _D. indivisa lineata_ is a very fine variety, the
leaves of which are much broader than those of the type, measuring
sometimes 4 ins. across, and coloured with reddish pink at the sheathing
base. Other good varieties are _D. indivisa atro-purpurea_, which has
the base of the leaf and the midrib on the under side of a dark purple;
and _D. indivisa Veitchii_, in which the habit and size of the leaf are
the same as in the species, but in addition it has a sheathing base and
the midrib on the under side is of a beautiful deep red. It would be
difficult to find a plant more worthy of cultivation than this. Where it
does well in the garden or pleasure-ground in the southern parts, it
surpasses any Yucca or other hardy plant that I know in respect of
distinctness and tropical-looking grace; and, this being the case, there
can be little need to plead for it to the many who have gardens in the
counties south of London. In all districts it may be placed in the open
garden in summer with fine effect, the rim of the pots plunged level
with, or a little below, the surface, and the plants either isolated on
the turf, in the centre of a bed of flowering plants, or grouped with
other fine-leaved subjects. In the conservatory it is one of the most
effective and graceful subjects at all seasons, and is of very easy
culture in rich sandy loam.

The _Dracænas_ are a very numerous family, and many more might be
described; but most of the other kinds have not been proved to possess
any excellence for the flower-garden, while those enumerated are
abundantly sufficient to represent the aspect of this graceful and
stately family.

=Echeveria metallica.=--This is scarcely high enough to be suitable for
association with the taller plants, but it is so very distinct in
aspect, and has been proved to grow so well in the open air during
several unfavourable seasons, that I must not pass it by. I purposely
exclude from this book many things sometimes found in lists of
“subtropical” plants, but which may be classed most properly with
bedding subjects. But this, although not very large, forms an agreeable
and distinct object, and is very well calculated for producing a
striking effect among dwarf bedding and edging plants. It may be
propagated by the leaves, by cuttings, or by seeds, and requires a dry
greenhouse-shelf in the winter. Light sandy earth, not of necessity very
poor, will suit it best in the open air. It will prove very effective on
the margins of beds and groups of the dwarfer foliage-plants, or here
and there among hardy succulents, and should be planted out about the
middle of May.

=*Echinops ruthenicus.=--A hardy ornamental plant from S. Russia, with
stems 3 or 4 feet high, much branched in the upper part, and covered
with a silvery down. The leaves are deeply toothed and spiny, of a dark
green above, white and cottony underneath. The flowers are blue, and
borne in almost spherical heads on the tops of the erect branches. The
plant flourishes best in a calcareous soil, but will do well in almost
any well-drained ground. Easily multiplied by seed, division of the
tufts, or by cuttings of the roots in spring. This is the most
ornamental of its distinct family, and is highly suitable for grouping
with the finer herbaceous plants. It would also look remarkably bold and
well if isolated on the turf.

=*Elymus arenarius.=--This wild British grass--a strong-rooting and most
distinct-looking herb--is capable of adding a striking feature to the
garden here and there, and should be quickly introduced into
cultivation. Planted a short distance away from the margin of a
shrubbery, or on a bank on the grass, and allowed to have its own way in
deep soil, it makes a most striking object. In short, it deserves to
rank high among really hardy fine grasses, the Pampas and the two
Arundos alone surpassing it. I am not quite certain that it is not more
useful than the Arundo, being hardy in all parts of these islands. In
very good soil it will grow 4 feet high; and as it is for the leaves we
should cultivate it, if the flowers are removed they will be no loss. It
is found frequently on our shores, but more abundantly in the north than
in the south. The variety called _geniculatus_, which has the spike
pendulous, is also worthy of culture, and in its case the flowers may
prove worth preserving. It may possibly be useful for covert, and is
certainly so for rough spots in the pleasure-ground and in semi-wild
places.

=*Elymus condensatus= (_Bunch grass_).--A vigorous perennial grass from
British Columbia, forming a dense, compact, column-like growth, more
than 8 ft. in height, covered from the base almost to the top with long
arching leaves, and crowned in the flowering season with numerous erect,
rigid spikes, each 6½ ins. long, and resembling an elongated ear of
wheat in form. It is a very ornamental plant, and may be associated with
our largest grasses. A very distinct variety has been raised in the
Edinburgh Royal Botanic Gardens, in which the spikes or ears are much
shorter and broader than those of the original form. For this the name
_Elymus condensatus compactus_ has been suggested.

=Entelea arborescens.=--A small, branching, light-wooded tree, 5 to 10
ft. high, with large, alternate, heart-shaped or three-lobed leaves
covered with stellate down, and white flowers, somewhat like those of a
small dog-rose, borne in umbels on the ends of a branching panicle. It
is peculiar to New Zealand, and is the only species of the genus. This
used to grow satisfactorily in the Paris gardens, but I have no
experience of it in this country. It will require greenhouse treatment
in winter, and is of but secondary importance for open-air culture.

=*Epimedium pinnatum.=--A hardy dwarf perennial from Asia Minor, from 8
ins. to 2½ ft. high, forming handsome tufts of long-stalked radical
pinnate leaves, and bearing long clusters of yellow flowers. The
handsome leaves remain on the plant until the new ones appear in the
ensuing spring. It is not a good plan to remove them, as they serve to
shelter the buds of the new leaves during the winter, and the plants
flower much better when they are allowed to remain. Cool, moist, peaty
soil, and a slightly-shaded position, will be found most suitable for
this, and the novel appearance of its foliage claims a place for it
among the dwarfer plants, groups of fine-foliaged hardy herbaceous
subjects, Mahonias, etc.

=*Equisetum Telmateia= (_Giant Horse-tail_).--A British plant of very
noble port and much grace of character when well-developed, growing from
3 ft. to 6 ft. high in favourable soil and positions. The stem is
furnished from top to bottom with spreading whorls of slender, slightly
drooping, quadrangular branches; the whole forming a pyramidal outline
of very distinct and pleasing effect. It is a highly ornamental subject
for planting in the hardy fernery, the artificial bog, shady peat
borders, near cascades, or among shrubs growing best in moist hollows in
vegetable soil. Multiplied by division.

=*Equisetum sylvaticum= is another native Horse-tail of much dwarfer
size, but of the most exquisite grace when grown; the stem standing from
8 to 15 inches high, and well covered with numerous slender, spreading,
or deflexed compound branches. Very suitable for rockwork, margins of
ornamental water, or any of the positions in which _E. Telmateia_ may be
grown. It also does well and looks very graceful when grown in pots in a
cold frame. Multiplied by division.

=*Erianthus Ravennæ.=--A highly ornamental grass from S. Europe,
somewhat like the Pampas grass in habit, but smaller in size, and
frequently having violet-tinged leaves. The flowering-stems grow from 5
ft. to 6½ ft. high; but as it only flowers with us in a very warm
season, it must be valued for its foliage alone. Its dense and handsome
tufts thrive well in light, dry, calcareous soil, in positions with a
south aspect. It thrives but poorly on cold soils, and will probably not
grow well north of London except in peculiarly favourable positions, and
in well-drained free loams. It is fitted for association with such
grasses as _Arundo conspicua_. Multiplied by division of the tufts in
spring or autumn.

[Illustration: Erianthus Ravennæ.]

=*Eryngium alpinum.=--A singular-looking plant, from 2 ft. to nearly 3
ft. high, forming a rather stiff bush, with leathery and very spiny
leaves of a sea-green colour, and bearing numerous roundish heads of
bluish flowers, the stems beneath them being also of a very handsome
blue for some inches down. Suitable for planting in the wilder parts of
pleasure-grounds, for isolation, for borders, or grouping with the
finest and most distinct subjects.

=*Eryngium amethystinum= is not so tall as the preceding, seldom growing
more than 2½ ft. high. It is remarkable for the beautiful amethystine
bloom which the leaves assume in July, and which they preserve until the
approach of frost. It is suitable for the positions recommended for the
preceding kind. Various other members of this family are useful in like
manner; indeed there is not one of them that is not so, including our
own common Sea Holly, _E. maritimum_.

=*Erythrina.=--These are very beautiful trees or shrubs, pretty
generally distributed through the tropics of both hemispheres. Some
attain great dimensions, while others are dwarf bushes with woody
rootstocks, and a few have the stems and leaf-stalks beset with
prickles. The leaves are trifoliate, with long stalks, and the leaflets
oval, lance-shaped, or triangular. Many of the species produce beautiful
large pea-flowers, usually of a blood-red or scarlet colour, in terminal
racemes. The varieties of these have proved very hardy and useful in the
summer garden, flowering freely, and showing considerable beauty of
foliage. Two round beds, each of 9 ft., and one oblong bed, 42 ft. by 5
ft., including _E. ornata_, _Marie Belanger_, _laurifolia_,
_crista-galli_, _profusa_, _Madame Belanger_, _ruberrima_, _Hendersoni_,
stood out last winter uninjured in Battersea Park; and, as many people
know, the common old _Erythrina crista-galli_ will thrive for years
against a warm south wall in a warm soil, if protected about the root in
winter.

=Eucalyptus.=--Handsome Australian trees and shrubs, of which there are
a vast number of species, many growing to an immense height. The leaves
are of a thick leathery texture, always quite entire, and very variable
in shape. In young plants they are opposite, heart-shaped, pointed, and
covered with a glaucous bloom; as they grow older, they become alternate
and sickle-shaped, the stalks acquiring a peculiar twist, so that the
leaves present their edges to the branches. The most hardy kinds are _E.
globulus_ and _E. Gunni_. Other kinds, however, will no doubt be found
sufficiently hardy. These are most likely to be attractive in the south
of England and Ireland, where a few of the species will be found to
thrive in the open air, as the peculiarly distinct and graceful habit of
the trees is not observed till they are 12 ft. or more above the ground.
Nevertheless some may grow them for the aspect they present after a
single year’s growth in the open air about London, in which case they
should be put out about the middle of May. I was very much struck with
their graceful and singular appearance in California, where they are
being planted in great variety.

=Farfugium grande.=--A very vigorous-growing perennial, with thick
fleshy stems, from 1 ft. to nearly 2 ft. high, and broad, cartilaginous,
almost heart-shaped leaves, of a light-green colour, variously streaked,
and spotted with yellow in one variety, and with white and rose-colour
in another. It flourishes best in free, substantial, moist soil which
contains a large proportion of vegetable mould, and in a half-shady
position. During the heats of summer it will require frequent watering.
At the approach of winter it should be removed to the conservatory or
cool greenhouse, except in the southern and milder districts, where it
survives an ordinary winter. In the colder parts of the country it is
scarcely worth planting out, it grows so slowly; but where it thrives it
is very ornamental in borders, isolated, or near the margin of beds.
Multiplied by division in spring; the offsets to be potted and kept in
the propagating-house or in a frame until they are well rooted.

=Ferdinanda eminens.=--This is one of the tallest and noblest
subtropical plants, growing well in the southern and midland counties
when it is supplied with rich soil and abundant moisture. It is also
very much the better for being sheltered. Where the soil is rich, deep,
and humid, and the position warm, it attains large dimensions, sometimes
growing over 12 ft. high, and suspending pairs of immense opposite
leaves. It will in all cases form a capital companion to the Castor-oil
plant, and, though it may not be grown with ease in all parts, it should
be in every collection. It requires to be planted out, in a young state,
about the middle of May, and grows freely from cuttings. Greenhouse
treatment will do in winter. It is better to keep a stock in pots
through the summer to afford cuttings, though the old ones may be used
for that purpose.


*FERULAS.

I wish it were not necessary to write in praise of such very fine plants
as these, so noble in aspect and beautiful in leaf. If 2000 kinds of
herbaceous plants are grown, the first things that show clearly above
the ground in the very dawn of spring (even in January) are their
deep-green and most elegant leaves. In good garden soil they look like
masses of _Leptopteris superba_, that most exquisite of ferns. Their
chief charm will probably be found to consist in their furnishing masses
of the freshest green and highest grace in early spring. The leaf is apt
to lose some of its beauty and fade away early in autumn, but this may
to some extent be retarded by cutting out the flower-bearing shoots the
moment they appear. Not that these are ugly; for, on the contrary, the
plants are fine and striking when in flower. It is indispensable that
the Ferulas, like some other hardy foliage-plants, be planted
permanently and well at first, as it is only when they are thoroughly
established that you get their full effect. At a first view, the best
way to treat them would appear to be so to arrange them that they would
be succeeded by things that flower in autumn, and only begin their rich
growth in early summer; but it will be equally wise to plant them near
the margin of a shrubbery, or wherever it is desired to have a
diversified and bold type of vegetation. We may look forward to the day
when a far greater variety of form will be seen in English gardens than
is at present observable, and these Ferulas are thoroughly well worth
growing for their superb spring and early summer effect. The best
species are

[Illustration: FERULA COMMUNIS.

Graceful herbaceous Type; dying down towards the end of summer, and
therefore most desirable for isolation near the margins of shrubberies,
etc.]

_F. communis_ and _tingitana_. Probably a few others, including _F.
glauca_, _neapolitana_, _nodiflora_, _asparagifolia_, _Ferulago_, and
_persica_, may with advantage be added where much variety is sought, but
the effect of any of the first three cannot be surpassed. Among the
“aspects of vegetation” which we may enjoy in these cold climes, nothing
equals that of their grand leaves, pushing up with the snowdrop. In
semi-wild spots, where spring flowers abound, it will prove a most
tasteful and satisfactory plan to drop a Ferula here and there in a
sunny spot, and leave it to nature and its own good constitution
afterwards. In general aspect these plants are much alike; it is better,
however, to describe some of them individually.

=*Ferula asparagifolia.=--An ornamental perennial, 4 ft. or 5 ft. high,
with very graceful and finely-cut leaves, the radical ones 1 ft. to 2
ft. long (including the leaf-stalk), repeatedly subdivided: the
divisions very narrow, linear, pointed, and set with hairs; the upper
stem-leaves are reduced to short sheaths, the lowest of which bear a
short pinnate limb.

=*Ferula communis.=--A very fine and striking hardy perennial, growing
from 6 ft. to 10 ft. or more high, with much-divided, spreading, shining
green leaves, repeatedly subdivided into linear, flaccid segments; the
lower leaves spreading more than 2 ft. each way; the sheaths of the
upper leaves very large.

=*Ferula Ferulago.=--A very ornamental kind, with striped stems, 6 ft.
to 8 ft. high, and much-divided leaves, with divided spreading leaflets,
which are nearly as broad as those of _F. tingitana_, but longer, and of
a darker green.

=*Ferula glauca.=--A valuable and imposing foliage-plant, 4 ft. to 6 ft.
or more high, with very much divided leaves, shining above, glaucous
beneath, cut into long, linear, flat segments. The stalks of the upper
leaves are widened above.

=*Ferula persica.=--A hardy perennial from Persia and the Caucasus, with
a glaucous stem from 3 ft. to 6 ft. high, tapering gradually upwards,
and very handsome, much-divided leaves, with rather distant lance-shaped
leaflets, widening and toothed or cut at the apex. Flowers in umbels,
without any general or partial involucrum. This plant is easily
distinguished by its strong asafœtida odour, and requires warm sandy
soil.

=*Ferula tingitana.=--A very noble plant, from 6 ft. to 8 ft. high, with
a stout stem and very glistening leaves, which are broader than those of
any other species, and repeatedly subdivided into oblong or lance-shaped
deeply-toothed segments.

=Ficus Chauvieri.=--A noble species, with a faultless habit, which does
well in the open air, and is the best kind after _F. elastica_. The
leaves are oval-obtuse in outline, of a very dark glistening green, with
pale-yellow veins, and usually have one or more large undulations on the
margin. Useful for the same purposes as the following species.

=Ficus elastica= (_India-rubber Plant_).--This is one of those valuable
leathery-leaved things that are useful in hothouse, drawing-room, or
flower-garden. It not only exists in the open air in summer in good
health, but makes a good growth under the influence of our weak northern
sun. Never assuming the imposing proportions of other plants mentioned
herein, it is best adapted for select mixed groups, and, in small
gardens, as isolated specimens amongst low bedding plants. It will best
enjoy stove treatment in winter, and is propagated from cuttings. It
should be put out at the end of May. In all cases it is better to use
plants with single stems.

[Illustration: Ficus elastica.]

=*Fuchsia.=--The Fuchsia, one of the most beautiful ornaments of the
garden when well grown, is comparatively rarely seen in our
flower-gardens. It is to be regretted that this is the case, for
assuredly there is nothing in cultivation more calculated to improve the
aspect of things therein. Not showy in mass of flower, like many things
common enough now, it is of the highest order of beauty; while the
drooping habit of the shoots of most kinds gives the plant a grace which
is valuable indeed, and which no flower-garden should be without. Even
in dwarf lines, where this drooping tendency is not seen to such
advantage, or, it may be, presents a disadvantage, the Fuchsia is very
valuable; but it is when we use plants with rather tall stems or
pyramids that the full beauty of the Fuschia as a flower-garden plant is
seen. And the right way to manage them is to make them as far as
possible produce _all their growth in the open air_. That is the secret:
start them, nurture them, and make them full of leaves and strong young
growth in the spring, so as to go out strong, and most likely you will
find them very disappointing indeed; but keep them back and do not let
them burst forth into leaf until put in the open air in May, and they
will then go on and retain all the strength they gather, suspending
quantities of graceful blossoms until the leaves have deserted the
trees, when they should be taken up and put in a dry cave, cellar, or
shed for the winter. In a cool position of that kind it would not be
difficult to “keep them back” in spring. And supposing they seemed
inclined to push forth too much before the time had quite arrived when
it would be convenient or desirable to put them in the flower-garden,
there should be no difficulty in placing them in some quiet, sheltered
nook, where they might receive more protection than in the flower-garden
proper, and yet have full opportunity to make growth in the open
air--the great point to be attained. The freest and hardiest kinds
should be chosen for this purpose. In many places refuse plants may be
turned to good account in this way. Given a lot of specimen
Fuchsias--arrived, perhaps, at that stage when they must be parted with
to make way for younger plants and newer kinds--nothing is simpler than
to make of these standards for the flower-garden, by cutting away the
lower and middle side shoots, and leaving the head to form a standard.
Their exceptional grace when placed among fine foliage-plants induces me
to allude to them here.

=*Funkia Sieboldiana.=--A Japanese plant, remarkable for the elegance of
its leaves, which are large, broadly heart-shaped, of a greyish-green
colour, slightly undulating, and finely marked with regular lines of
prominent ribs. The flowers are of a light lilac or bluish colour, and
are borne in a drooping unilateral cluster at the extremity of a
leafless stem 1 ft. or 16 ins. high. Thrives best in a light, cool,
sandy soil in a sheltered half-shady position. It will also thrive well
in peat. Multiplied by division of the tufts in autumn, once in three or
four years. Useful among the dwarfer herbaceous plants, etc., and
occasionally as a groundwork in beds of shrubs with fine foliage.

=*Galega officinalis.=--A handsome, hardy, and vigorous-growing plant, 3
ft. to 5 ft. high, forming graceful tufts of pinnate leaves, and
flowering abundantly and for a long time; the flowers are of a pale
blue, in long, dense clusters or spikes. Although it will grow in almost
any soil, it does best in a deep, free, moist, sandy clay. This not
uncommon herbaceous plant is alluded to here in consequence of its
graceful leaves, which fit it for taking a part in the groups of
handsome hardy subjects so often suggested in this book.

=Geranium anemonæfolium.=--A handsome perennial from Madeira, with a
simple, woody, erect stem 1 ft. to 14 ins. in height, covered with dry
scales. The leaves, which are of a bright green, smooth, and very much
divided, are chiefly collected at the base of the plant, from which
they extend horizontally on stalks from 20 ins. to 2 ft. long. The
flowers are very numerous, and of a lilac rose-colour. It is a highly
ornamental plant both in foliage and flower, and may be used with good
effect grouped with comparatively dwarf kinds, or occasionally as an
edging to tall subjects. It is best raised in frames and put out early
in May. Multiplied by seed, which it yields freely.

=*Gynerium argenteum= (_Pampas grass_).--This fine plant is so well
known that there is no excuse for naming it here, except the opportunity
to say a few words as to the splendid use we may make of it in the
branch of gardening we are now discussing. It deserves as much attention
as any plant in cultivation, and yet how rarely is any thorough
preparation made for its perfect development. What is there growing in
garden or in wild more nobly distinct and beautiful than the great
silvery plumes of this plant waving in the autumnal gusts--the burial
plumes as it were of our summer too early dead? What tender plant so
effective as this in giving a new aspect of vegetation to our gardens,
if it be tastefully placed and well grown? Long before it flowers it
possesses more merit for its foliage and habit than scores of things
cultivated indoors for their effect--Dasylirions, etc., for example--and
it would be well worthy of being extensively used if one of its
silken-crested wands were never put forth in autumn. It is not enough to
place it in out-of-the-way spots, but the general scene of every garden
and pleasure-ground should be influenced by it. It should be planted
even far more extensively than it is at present, and given very deep and
good soil either natural or made. The

[Illustration: GYNERIUM ARGENTEUM.

Giant hardy evergreen ornamental Grass.]

soils of very many gardens are insufficient to give it the highest
degree of strength and vigour, and no plant better repays for a thorough
preparation, which ought to be the more freely given when it is
considered that one preparation suffices for many years. If convenient,
give it a somewhat sheltered position in the flower-garden, so as to
prevent as much as possible that ceaseless searing away of the foliage
which occurs wherever the plant is much exposed to the breeze. We rarely
see such fine specimens as in quiet nooks where it is pretty well
sheltered by the surrounding vegetation. It is very striking to come
upon noble specimens in such quiet green nooks; but, as before hinted,
to leave such a magnificent plant out of the flower-garden proper is a
decided mistake. Seed and division.

=*Gunnera scabra.=--Mr. Darwin met with this in a region where the
vegetation is so luxuriant that the branches of the trees extend over
the sea, somewhat like those of a shrubbery of evergreens over a gravel
walk. “I one day noticed growing on the sandstone cliffs some very fine
plants of the Panke (_Gunnera scabra_), which somewhat resembles the
rhubarb on a gigantic scale. The inhabitants eat the stalks, which are
sub-acid, and tan leather with the roots, and prepare a black dye from
them. The leaf is nearly circular, but deeply indented on its margin. I
measured one which was nearly 8 ft. in diameter, and therefore no less
than 24 ft. in circumference! The stalk is rather more than a yard high,
and each plant sends out four or five of these enormous leaves,
presenting altogether a very noble appearance.” Of a spot in the same
neighbourhood he says: “The forest was so impenetrable that no one who
has not beheld it can imagine so entangled a mass of dying and dead
trunks. I am sure that often for more than ten minutes together our feet
never touched the ground, and we were frequently ten or fifteen feet
above it; so that the seamen, as a joke, called out the soundings!” Yet
I have grown this plant to great size in a cold British bog. Mr. Darwin
does not speak of the inflorescence, which is more remarkable than the
leaves. The little flowers and seeds are seated densely on conical
fleshy masses a few inches long, and these in their turn being seated as
densely as they can be packed on a thick stem, the whole has the
appearance of a compound cone a couple of feet high (on strong plants),
very heavy, and perhaps the oddest-looking thing ever seen in the way of
fructification. This great spike springs from the root itself, the
leaves also springing from the root, as in the case of the rhubarbs. I
had two plants in a wet peat bog--one in deep rich soil, with the crown
well raised above the level, and the whole protected under a couple of
barrowloads of leaf mould; the other left exposed, and not allowed any
particularly good soil. Both plants survived the severest winters, but
the protected and well-fed one grew much the larger. The leaves of the
larger plant used sometimes to grow 4 ft. in diameter, the texture being
of extraordinary thickness and rugosity. I have, however, in the Royal
Gardens at Kew, seen it grown to a larger size than that. The bottom
there is the reverse of bog, while the situation is warmer and more
sheltered than where I grew it. But the Kew people met its wants very
cleverly, by building a little bank of turf around it, so

[Illustration: GUNNERA SCABRA.

Hardy herbaceous Section; attaining huge dimensions in deep, rich, moist
soil.]

as to admit of its absorbing a thorough dose of water now and then,
while in winter it was protected with dry leaves and a piece of
tarpaulin. Similar protection, plenty of water in summer, and a warm and
sheltered position, are all that are necessary for success with this
very striking subject. It is not difficult to obtain, and may be raised
from seed, though that is a slow way. It should be planted in some
isolated spot, and not as a rule in the “flower-garden proper,” as it
must not be disturbed after being well planted, and would associate
badly with the ordinary occupants of the parterre. The plant cannot have
too much sun or warmth, but makes little progress if its huge leaves are
torn by storms. In places with any diversity of surface it will be easy
to select a spot well open to the sun and yet sheltered by surrounding
objects (shrubs, clumps, etc.). The figure shows more the habit of the
plant than the character of its huge compound fleshy spike, on which the
small seeds are thickly scattered.

=*Gymnocladus canadensis= (_Kentucky Coffee-tree_).--A remarkable hardy
forest tree, which, kept in a young state, will furnish a fine head of
foliage. It has twice-divided leaves, the leaflets of which stand
vertically. On young trees the leaves are more than 3 ft. long, and on
subjects confined to a single stem and cut down every year they would
prove even larger than that. It grows wild in Canada, but more
abundantly and larger in Kentucky and Tennessee, where it used to be
employed as a substitute for coffee--hence the common name. It loves a
rich deep soil, and is propagated by seeds and cuttings of the roots. It
will prove very suitable for planting in similar positions to those
recommended for the Ailantus.

=Hedychium Gardnerianum.=--A stove herbaceous plant from the East
Indies, growing from 3¼ ft. to 6½ ft. high, with broadly lance-shaped
clasping leaves in two rows, and bearing, in autumn, lemon-coloured
flowers with a strong Jonquille perfume, in terminal spikes nearly a
foot long. Another species, _H. aurantiacum_, has handsome orange
flowers. These handsome plants may have been seen flowering in the open
air in the gardens at Battersea Park, very pleasing and effective in
shady nooks--not planted out but kept in the pots in which they were
grown. They should be put out about the end of May.

=*Helianthus annuus= (_Sun-flower_).--This common and familiar annual
plant may be usefully employed in adorning the rougher parts of
pleasure-grounds in warm positions, where it will thrive to best
advantage. Although very hardy and capable of being grown in almost any
soils, it prefers those that are substantial and free.

=*Helianthus orgyalis.=--A very distinct-looking hardy plant, growing 6
ft. or 8 ft. high. Its distinctiveness arises from the fact that the
leaves are recurved in a peculiarly graceful manner. At the top of the
shoots, indeed, their aspect is most striking, from their springing up
in great profusion and then bending gracefully down. It will form a
capital subject for groups of fine-leaved, hardy plants, or for
isolation by wood-walks, etc. As it is apt to come up rather thickly,
the cultivator will act judiciously by thinning out the shoots when very
young, so that those which remain may prove stronger and better
furnished with leaves. N. America.

=*Hemerocallis fulva.=--This is one of those fine old plants formerly
grown in almost every garden, but which

[Illustration: HERACLEUM

Coarse herbaceous Type; foliage perishing late in summer.]

has latterly sunk into unmerited neglect, as from its luxuriance, the
height of its stem (nearly 4 ft.), and its fine, large, tawny-orange
flowers, it well deserves a place among vigorous and striking subjects.
It is thoroughly hardy and will thrive in almost any soil, but comes to
greatest perfection in that which is deep, substantial, and moist, and
in almost any position. Multiplied by dividing the tufts once in three
or four years in autumn when the leaves are withered, or in spring.
There is a variety of this species with double flowers, and one with
variegated leaves, both of which are somewhat tender and require
well-drained soil and a sheltered position.

Other species in cultivation are _H. flava_, _H. disticha_, _H.
graminea_, and _H. Dumortieri_. All these plants are desirable
associates for the hardy fine-leaved plants.

=*Heracleums= (_Cow-parsnips_).--No perennials rival these plants in
size, and few in distinctness of appearance. The shape and width of
their leaves, the height of their stems, and especially the great size
of their umbels, produce an effect of a very striking character. Planted
singly on slopes in the rougher parts of pleasure-grounds, on or about
ruins, rough wild declivities, or by pieces of water or streams, they
are seen to excellent advantage; their enormous leaves forming great
tufts of vegetation, sometimes nearly 13 ft. in diameter. The period of
their greatest vigour and beauty is from May to the end of July; and
this should be distinctly borne in mind when arranging them, as, once
the great leaves fade away with the heats of early August, they become
very ragged, and soon disappear altogether. They delight in a moist,
deep, clay soil, but will grow vigorously in almost any kind of cool
soil, and even on rubbish-heaps. They are easily multiplied, either from
seed or by division of the tufts early in spring, or after the ripening
of the seed. They usually sow themselves freely.

=*Heracleum eminens.=--A peculiarly distinct species, easily known by
the blunt or roundish lobes of its trifoliate leaves, which also possess
the advantage of lasting longer than the leaves of other kinds. They are
of a thick texture, and finely covered with velvety down, which gives
them a slightly glaucous appearance, whereby they may also be
distinguished. I have only seen the plant in a young state in Paris
gardens, and cannot say what it is like when fully grown; but it is
probably dwarfer in stature and more compact in habit than most of the
other kinds, and, as the leaves last so much longer in perfection, it is
suited for grouping among choicer subjects. For isolation on the grass,
after the fashion of the Acanthuses, etc., it is particularly well
suited. Seed or division.

=*Heracleum flavescens.=--A vigorous species, 5 ft. to 6 ft. high, with
deeply-furrowed rough stems, and convex green leaves, with ovate or
oblong serrate divisions. Flowers yellowish, in large umbels. Suitable
for banks of rivers or ponds, where effective foliage is desired. S.
Europe. Seed.

=*Heracleum persicum.=--A vigorous perennial, of rapid growth and
imposing dimensions, attaining a height of more than 6½ ft., and bearing
whitish flowers in umbels, the upper one of which is more than 16 ins.
across. The stem does not branch much, and the leaves are chiefly
radical and very large. Persia.

=*Heracleum pubescens.=--This species bears yellowish-white flowers, in
umbels about a foot in diameter, and grows to a height of from 6 ft. to
9 ft. or more. The leaves are very large, roughish on the upper side,
and much divided into elliptical segments, which are pointed and stand
close together. Crimea.

=*Heracleum villosum.=--A species distinguished by its very downy and
fringed fruit, with robust stems, 6½ ft. high or more. Leaves broad,
much divided, the segments coarsely toothed, covered with a whitish down
on the under side. Flowers in large umbels. Caucasus.

=*Heracleum Wilhelmsii.=--The leaves of this species are very large,
downy, and wrinkled, much divided, with lance-shaped, acute segments
distant from each other. The stem is more than 6½ ft. high, and bears
whitish flowers, in umbels from 10 ins. to 12 ins. in diameter. Siberia.

Several other species are in cultivation, the principal of which is _H.
platytænium_, a biennial of very large dimensions, and remarkably
ornamental in habit and foliage.

=Humea elegans.=--This well-known plant may be very agreeably associated
with many of the subjects mentioned in this book, and is a graceful
object in the centres of beds, etc. To be put out early in May. New
Holland.

=*Hydrangea quercifolia.=--This is quite distinct in aspect from the
common Hydrangeas, and sufficiently striking to deserve a place where
variety of form is sought. The leaves are, as the name indicates,
somewhat lobed and oak-like in outline. It is best adapted to form a
bush, its natural habit, and is best used singly. I, however, have never
tried to train young plants of it with a single stem; it might be worth
the trial. It is a native of N. America. A rich and somewhat moist soil,
with shelter, will be found to suit it best. Well adapted for isolation.

=*Inula Helenium.=--A vigorous-growing British plant, about 3 ft. or 4
ft. high, with a stout stem, branching in the upper part, and large,
oblong-oval leaves, of a delicate green colour. The flowers are yellow,
and are borne in loose clusters. Well suited for planting along with
other large-leaved plants, or as isolated specimens on rough slopes, or
wild places, in free, moist, good soil. Multiplied by division in spring
or autumn, or by seed.

=*Jubæa spectabilis.=--A very handsome, hardy S. American palm, with a
short, arboreous, smooth stem, which sometimes attains a height of
nearly 40 ft., and spreading pinnate leaves, of a full, deep-green
colour, and from 6 ft. to 12 ft. long, the leaflets being from 1 ft. to
1½ ft. long and about an inch wide, springing in pairs from nearly the
same spot, and standing out in different directions. The leaf-stalks are
very thick at the base, where they are enclosed in a dense mass of
rough, brown fibres, which grow upon their lower edges. The soil for
this plant should be a mixture of two parts of rich loam and two parts
composed of peat, leaf-mould, and sand. This exists in the open air
throughout the winter, near London, but not in such a condition as to
encourage many to try it in this way. Grown in tubs in the conservatory
in winter, and placed in the open air in summer, it will prove very
satisfactory for association with the hardier palms.

=*Juncus effusus spiralis.=--A very singular-looking rush, forming
spreading tufts of leaves, which, instead of growing, straight, like
those of other kinds, are curiously twisted in a regular corkscrew form.
From its very unusual appearance it is well worthy of cultivation, and
may be planted with advantage on the margins of pieces of water, near
cascades, etc., or in the artificial bog. It is easily multiplied by
division of the tufts.

=*Kochia scoparia.=--An annual plant of the Goose-foot family, forming a
neat, compact, pointed bush, from 3 to 5 ft. in height. The flowers are
green and insignificant, but the graceful habit of the plant renders it
valuable and effective, placed either singly or in groups, on the slopes
of pleasure-grounds, especially from July to September--the time of its
full development. It should be sown in April and May, in a hotbed, and
afterwards planted out in beds or borders. Southern Europe.

=*Kœlreuteria paniculata.=--A small sized, hardy, deciduous tree, from
N. China, from 15 ft. to 19 ft. high, and handsome both in foliage and
flower. The leaves are pinnate, and of a dark, glistening-green colour;
the leaflets ovate, and coarsely toothed. Flowers yellow, in terminal,
spreading clusters, and succeeded by large, reddish, pendent, bladdery
capsules, which render the tree conspicuous till late in the autumn. It
does best in rich, moist soil. When planted in a dry and arid position,
the leaves are never so large or glistening, and soon turn yellow and
fall. It is one of the trees which may, as advised for the Ailantus, be
kept in a small state by cutting them down annually, and will, thus
treated, furnish a fine effect. Easily multiplied by seed, layers, and
cuttings.

=Latania borbonica.=--A well-known, hardy, and favourite palm,
attaining a height of 25 ft., with large, fan-shaped leaves, over 5 ft.
broad, of a cheerful green colour, and with pendent marginal segments.
The leaf-stalks are over 4 ft. or 5 ft. long, and are armed at the edges
for half their length with short reflexed spines. May be placed in the
open air about London and southward in sunny dells in summer, and is a
fine warm-conservatory or stove ornament in winter.

=*Lavatera arborea.=--This plant, which has the appearance of a small
tree, attains in the southern counties the height of nearly 10 ft. The
stem is simple for some distance, and then branches into a broad,
compact, roundish, and very leafy head. It may be used to adorn warm and
sheltered parts of pleasure-grounds and rough places. In rich
well-drained beds it would prove a worthy companion for the Ricinus and
the Cannas. It is most at home on dry soils, but during the summer
months thrives on all. When planted in the shelter of a south wall it
has been known to live for several years and to have almost woody stems
from 2 ins. to 4 ins. in diameter at the base. Italy.

=*Ligularia macrophylla= (_Large-leaved L._).--A vigorous perennial,
with an erect stem nearly 3½ ft. high, and very large, glaucous, erect,
long-stalked, oval leaves. The flowers are yellow, and are borne in a
dense long spike at the end of the stem. The most suitable soil for this
plant is that which is free, moist, and somewhat peaty. Multiplied by
careful division in autumn or in spring. It is a useful subject for
grouping with fine-leaved herbaceous plants, but will seldom command a
place in the select flower-garden. Caucasus.

=*Malva crispa.=--A vigorous-growing annual, 3 to 6½ ft., or more, in
height, growing in an erect, pyramidal bush of densely-crowded, broad
leaves, with a very undulating curled or frizzled margin. The flowers
are small, white, and inconspicuous. Bushes of this are pretty in
groups, beds, or borders. It may be sown in cool frames and put out
early in May, by which means strong plants may be obtained early in the
season.

[Illustration: Malva crispa.]

=*Martynia lutea.=--A very pretty annual from Brazil, about 1½ ft. high,
with roundish leaves and handsome yellow flowers, collected in
cylindrical clusters at the angles of the principal branches. It
requires a light, rich, cool soil, a warm position, and frequent
watering in summer. Its large leaves and ornamental bloom make it a
desirable subject for beds, groups, and borders. Increased by seed.

=*Megaseas.=--Some parts of pleasure-grounds for which there may be a
difficulty in finding any subject that will either thrive in such
places, or that is not too commonplace to be thought of, may be very
advantageously occupied by a few specimens of _Megasea cordifolia_ and
_M. crassifolia_, the large, leathery, persistent leaves of which will,
in such positions, preserve their freshness through the winter, and in
the earliest days of spring be surmounted by dense clusters of very
pleasing rose-coloured flowers. These plants are very hardy perennials,
and will require hardly any care after planting them. They are well
suited for embellishing cascades and rough rockwork, are not fastidious
as to soil, and are easily multiplied by division of the tufts.

=Melanoselinum decipiens.=--An umbelliferous shrub, from Madeira, with a
round simple stem, bare below, and large spreading compound leaves with
oval toothed segments and sheathing leaf-stalks. Flowers white, borne in
umbels. Should be planted out in May. A useful subject for isolation on
grass-plats, etc., and requiring greenhouse or warm-frame treatment in
winter. Young plants are to be preferred for ornamental purposes.
Multiplied by seed.

=Melia Azedarach= (_Pride of India_).--A very ornamental tree, but with
us usually seen in a small state. It is a native of India, but is now
naturalised in various parts of S. Europe. It usually grows from 13 ft.
to 17 ft. high, and bears its smooth dark-green pinnate leaves chiefly
clustered together at the ends of the branches. The flowers are of a
lilac colour, and emit an agreeable perfume: they are produced in large
bunches which issue from the axils of the leaves. The fruit is
considered poisonous. Healthy young plants kept to a single stem, and
cut down to within a foot or two of the base annually, form graceful
objects in the ornamental garden, throwing up an erect stout stem
regularly clothed with leaves twice and thrice divided, from 16 ins. to
more than 2 ft. long and from 1 ft. to nearly 18 ins. across. Plant out
in early summer. A substantial, well-manured soil, a shady position, and
frequent waterings in summer are necessary for

[Illustration: MELIANTHUS MAJOR.

Herbaceous Type: best treated as a perennial, and protected at the roots
in winter.]

the development of the ornamental qualities of the Melia. In winter it
requires the shelter of a greenhouse with us. Multiplied by seed or
layers.

=*Melianthus major.=--This is usually treated as a greenhouse plant, and
is sometimes put out of doors in summer. So grown, however, the full
beauty of the plant has not time to develope; and much the better way is
to treat it as a half-hardy subject, putting it out in some sunny and
sheltered spot, where the roots will not suffer from wet in winter. The
shoots will be cut down by frost, but the root will live and push up
strong stems in spring, forming by midsummer a bush about 3 ft. high,
very distinct and beautiful, with large, pinnate, light sea-green
leaves, which will not suffer from rain storms. I have grown it in this
way to a much more presentable condition than it ever assumes indoors,
where it is usually drawn too much. I used to protect the roots in
winter by placing leaves over them, and then covering all with a
handlight, but have seen the plant survive without this precaution. It
is, however, best to make quite sure by using protection, except where
the soil and climate are particularly favourable. _Melianthus minor_ has
the habit of _M. major_, but is smaller in every respect and flowers
later. Its inflorescence also is different, the flowers being of a
yellowish red, and growing in short clusters. Cape of Good Hope.

=*Meum athamanticum.=--One of the most elegant and gracefully-cut plants
in an order second to no other for these qualities. The leaves are
divided so finely as to appear as if they were made of vegetable hair,
and the plant is dwarf and neat in habit, from 6 inches to 1 foot high;
easy of growth in ordinary soils, and perfectly hardy and perennial. It
is probable that in dry seasons it might “go off” too soon for
association with autumn-flowering plants, but for rockwork, borders, or
mixed arrangements of any sort it is invaluable. A British plant, easily
increased by division.

=*Molopospermum cicutarium.=--A very ornamental umbelliferous plant, 5
ft. or more in height, with large, deeply-divided leaves of a lively
green colour, forming a dense irregular bush. The flowers, which are
insignificant and of a yellowish-white colour, are borne in small
roundish umbels. There is a deep green and fern-like beauty displayed
profusely by some of the umbelliferous family, but I have rarely met
with one so remarkably attractive as this species. Many of the class,
while very elegant, perish quickly, get shabby indeed by the end of
June, and are therefore out of place in the tasteful flower-garden; but
this is firm in character, of a fine rich green, stout yet spreading in
habit, growing more than a yard high, and making altogether a most
pleasing bush. It is perfectly hardy, and easily increased by seed or
division, but rare as yet. Loves a deep moist soil, but will thrive in
any good garden soil. It is a fine subject for isolation or grouping
with other hardy and graceful-leaved umbelliferous plants. Carniola.

=Monstera deliciosa.=--This very remarkable-looking plant has been found
to bear being placed in the open air with impunity in shady and
sheltered spots from the beginning of June till the end of September.
Its great perforated leaves look so singular that everybody should grow
it who has a stove in which to do so, and it is so

[Illustration: MONSTERA DELICIOSA

Tender Section; stands well in the open air in summer in warm and
sheltered spots.]

[Illustration: MONTAGNÆA HERACLEIFOLIA (_Polymnia grandis_).

One of the noblest of the tender section, making free growth in the open
air during summer.]

readily grown and propagated that a plant may soon be spared for placing
in the open air during the warmer months. Although, however, it will
exist in the open air for a few months in warm and sheltered spots in
this country, it is only to be seen to perfection in the stove. Few
subjects possess nobler or more singular foliage, or are more worthy of
a place for effect alone, while its fruit is edible and produced freely
enough when the plant is well-grown. The culture is quite simple--plenty
of rich soil, a high temperature, and abundance of moisture. I have seen
the plant fruit well in what is called an “intermediate house,” but,
where convenient, it is much better to place it in a warm stove.
Wherever rockwork or any picturesque arrangement is attempted in any of
these structures; no nobler plant can be selected for its embellishment.
It crawls over such positions with a snake-like stem, and a trail of
great leathery leaves perforated in many places, as shown in the plate.
Mexico.

=Montagnæa heracleifolia= (_Polymnia grandis_).--This is second to no
other plant for its dignified and finished effect in the flower-garden,
forming a handsome shrub with large, opposite, much-divided, and
elegantly-lobed leaves, which are often nearly 3 ft. long, presenting
very striking and luxuriant masses of foliage. The stem and leaf-stalks
are spotted with white, and the leaves when young are covered with a
soft white down. Like most large soft-growing things in this way, it is
best planted out in a young state, so as to ensure a fresh and unstinted
growth. Easily multiplied from cuttings, which plants freely produce if
placed in heat in January. It is best planted out at the end of May,
and should be in every collection. Mexico.

=*Morina longifolia.=--A hardy perennial of handsome and singular
appearance, the large spiny leaves resembling those of certain Thistles,
while the long spikes of whorled flowers, which are from 2 to 3 ft.
high, are almost identical in form with the inflorescence of many of the
Labiate family. It grows well in ordinary well-drained soil, preferring
that which is mellow, deep, and moist. Easily multiplied by sowing the
seed as soon as it ripens, in light, peaty, sandy soil. In our winters
it would be advisable to cover the plants with litter, as it is the
dampness and sudden changes of the atmosphere which appear to injure it
rather than the cold. Being a fine-flowering plant, as well as
remarkable for its leaves, it is excellent for every kind of mixed
border, and also for grouping with the smaller and medium-sized
perennials that have fine foliage or are singular in appearance. Nepaul.

[Illustration: Morina longifolia.]

=*Mulgedium alpinum.=--A tall mountain-plant of the Sow-thistle family,
with very broad leaves and stems over 3 ft. high. The flowers are very
numerous, of a dark-blue colour, resembling those of the Chicory, and
are borne erect on the upper parts of the branching stems. A somewhat
shaded position and a very moist deep loam are necessary to the vigorous
growth of this plant, which will prove effective in the rougher parts of
the pleasure-ground. Multiplied by division. Alps.

=*Mulgedium Plumieri.=--A vigorous herbaceous perennial, 4 ft. to 6 ft.
high, with very large, deeply-cut radical leaves somewhat glaucous
underneath, bearing late in summer large spreading terminal corymbs of
blue flowers. A good subject for association with strong-growing
herbaceous plants in groups, or as isolated tufts by wood-walks, in deep
rich soil. S. of France.

[Illustration: Mulgedium alpinum.]

=Musa Ensete.=--The noblest of all the fine-leaved plants yet used in
the flower-garden is _Musa Ensete_--the great Abyssinian Banana,
discovered by Bruce--the stem of which has been known to attain a
diameter of more than 3 ft. at the base, and a height of from 13 ft. to
nearly 20 ft. The huge leaves, borne nearly erect, are oblong in shape
and of a beautiful bright-green colour, with a very stout deep-red
midrib. In the open air they often grow nearly 10 ft. long and nearly 2
ft. broad. The fruit of this kind is not edible, like that of the Banana
and Plantain (_Musa paradisiaca_ and _M. sapientum_), but the leaves
are magnificent, and they stand the rain and storms of our northern
climes with little laceration, while all the other kinds of Musa become
torn into shreds. It has hitherto been generally grown in stoves; but it
is an interesting and, until recently, little known fact, that the
finest of all the Banana or Musa tribe is also the hardiest and most
easily preserved. When grown for the open air it will of course require
to be kept in a house during winter and planted out the first week in
June. In any place where there is a large conservatory or winter-garden
it will be found most valuable, either for planting therein or for
keeping over the winter, as, if merely housed in such a structure during
the cold months, it will prove a great ornament among the other plants,
while it may be put out in summer, when the attraction is all out of
doors. Other kinds of Musa have been tried in the open air in England,
but have barely existed, making it clear that they should not be so
cultivated in this country. _M. Ensete_ is the only species really worth
growing in this way. Where the climate is too cold to put it out of
doors in summer, it should be grown in all conservatories in which it is
desired to establish the noblest type of vegetation. It also stands the
drought and heat of a dwelling-house remarkably well, and though, when
well developed, it is much too big for any but Brobdingnagian halls, the
fact may nevertheless be taken much advantage of by those interested in
room-decoration on a large scale. The plant is difficult to obtain as
yet, but will, I trust, be soon made abundant by our nurserymen.

In September, 1868, I saw a fine plant of this Musa

[Illustration: MUSA ENSETE.

Noblest of tender Section; thriving in the open air in summer, in the
warmer districts in summer and in the conservatory in winter.]

that had remained in the open ground in Baron Haussmann’s garden in the
Bois de Boulogne during the preceding winter. It was left in the
position in which it grew during the summer of 1867, and in the month of
November covered with a little thatched shed, the space about the plant
being filled with dry leaves. All the leaves were cut off. In spring the
protection was removed and the plant pushed vigorously. It had, when I
saw it, 16 leaves, not one of which was torn or lacerated, although it
was in an exposed position. It was not more than 5 ft. high, but was
more attractive than much larger individuals of the same species, from
being so compact and untattered in its foliage. As most people who grow
it will have means of keeping it indoors in winter, and as it is so
rare, this mode of keeping it is not likely to be taken advantage of
with us at present; but that it can and has been so wintered is an
interesting fact.

Other species are: _M. paradisiaca_ (the Plantain); _M. sapientum_ (the
Banana); _M. Cavendishii_, a dwarf-growing kind, seldom exceeding 5 ft.
or 6 ft. in height, and fruiting freely in a stove; _M. superba_, and
_M. zebrina_. These, however, are all properly hothouse kinds, and do
not thrive in the open air.

=Nelumbium luteum.=--This is perhaps second to none of its fine family
in beauty. In the Paris Garden a plant remained in a fountain-basin, in
a very sheltered position, for several years, flowering yearly. On the
11th of September, 1868, the petals of one of these flowers measured
each 6 ins. in length! and consequently the flower fully spread out was
more than a foot in diameter. The singular-looking disk within these
great fragrant flowers is as interesting as the flower itself, and far
more peculiar. The flowers are of a pale yellow, with a single deep
stain of rosy crimson at the apex of each petal. The leaves push boldly
above the water, are quite round, 12 ins. to 15 ins. in diameter, and of
a peculiar bluish-green. If the hand be placed under one of them, so as
to slightly raise the outer parts of the large plate-like leaf, a hollow
will of course be formed; and if water be poured into this so as to
cover exactly the centre of the stem which supports and feeds the leaf,
a curious result will be noticed. Bubbles of air will rise rapidly one
after another from exactly over the part where the leaf joins its stem.
In this particular leaf this spot is marked by being of a much lighter
green than the remainder of the leaf. This would be well worth trying in
the southern counties on the margin of ponds, etc., where it would be
fine associated with _Nuphar advena_, and the like. It should be put out
early in May.

=Nelumbium speciosum= (_Sacred Bean_).--An Egyptian water-plant of very
great beauty, with round sea-green leaves from 10 ins. to over a foot in
diameter, some of which float on the surface of the water, while others
are elevated above it at various heights up to 2½ ft. Above the highest
leaves appear the large, solitary, white, rosy-tipped flowers, which are
about 10 ins. broad, and are very fragrant. As the plant is somewhat
tender, it should be grown in tubs, and placed in rather shallow water
(which is more easily warmed by the sun) from the end of May until the
end of September in a position

[Illustration: NICOTIANA TABACUM. (_Var. macrophylla_).

Annual Section; forming handsome specimens within a few months after
sowing.]

sheltered from sudden changes of the atmosphere. A mixture of good loam,
sharp sand, and charcoal seems to answer it best. Multiplied by division
of the rootstocks, or by seed. Wherever there is a contrivance for
heating the water in a small pond or tank in the open air, these two
remarkable plants would be well worth a trial.

=Nicotiana Tabacum= (_Common Tobacco_).--There are several varieties of
this well-known plant, distinguished by the different length and width
of their oblong lance-shaped leaves and the lighter or deeper colour of
their rosy flowers. A deep, well-drained, light soil, rich in decayed
vegetable matter, is essential to this plant, as is also copious
watering in summer. As it is so readily raised from seed, and grows
luxuriantly in rich soil, I need not say it is a very desirable subject
for association with the Castor-oil plant and the like, and especially
suited for the many who desire plants of noble habit, but who cannot
preserve the tender ones through the winter under glass. It should be
raised in a hotbed, and put out in May. Height, 6 ft. or more. _N.
macrophylla_ is the finest variety.

=Nicotiana wigandioides.=--A species of recent introduction, with a
simple stem 6 ft. or more high, and very large, broad, woolly leaves
which grow in a somewhat erect position. If placed in a hothouse at the
close of the year, it becomes woody and branching, and assumes an
arborescent habit. Requires good substantial, well-manured soil, and
copious watering. This is a useful plant for grouping with the
medium-sized tender subjects in rich, light, well-drained soils, and
should be planted out about the middle of May.

=*Nuphar advena.=--A hardy Water-lily from N. America, with broad,
oval-heart-shaped leaves, some floating on the surface of the water, and
some emerging well above it. The flowers are rather large, of a
golden-yellow colour, with scarlet stamens. This plant is as hardy as
our native water-lilies, and is therefore adapted for any position in
which they will grow. In N. America it occurs chiefly in still or
stagnant waters. The bold and large leaves make it peculiarly suitable
for placing near the margin of water in the vicinity of groups of
picturesque plants.

[Illustration: Onopordum Acanthium.]

=*Onopordum Acanthium.=--A native biennial plant of bold, habit and
vigorous growth, with stout, branching stems often more than 5 ft. high,
and very large, undulating, spiny leaves, covered with long, whitish,
cobweb-like hairs. Flowers purplish, in large, solitary, terminal heads.
_O. illyricum_ has greener and more deeply-cut leaves, stiffer stems, a
more branching habit, and much more spiny leaves and stems. _O.
arabicum_ grows to the height of nearly 8 ft. with an erect and very
slightly branching habit, and has both sides of the leaves, as well as
the stems, covered with a white down. All these species are very hardy,
and thrive well in ordinary soil. They are particularly adapted for the
rougher and more neglected parts of pleasure-grounds, where they will
sow themselves.

=*Osmunda regalis.=--This, the largest and most striking of our native
ferns (sometimes attaining a height of 8 ft.), is one of the most
ornamental subjects that can be grown in certain positions. It should be
planted in moist peaty soil in half-shady places, on the banks of
streams, the margins of pieces of water, by cascades, etc. It may also
be planted in the water with good effect. It has been found to do well
exposed to the full sun, when its roots are in a constantly moist,
porous, moss-covered soil, in a position sheltered from strong winds. In
shady positions it would be found to attain great stature if planted in
deep, well-manured soil. The various North American Osmundas should also
be associated with this. There are several varieties to be met with in
gardens, the handsomest of which perhaps is _O. r. cristata_. Popular
and almost universally cultivated as the Osmunda is; however, it is not
at all common to see the Royal Fern and several other Osmundas otherwise
than in a shabby, or at best in a half-developed, condition. Mr. A.
Parsons, of Danesbury, a well-known florist and cultivator of ferns, has
overcome this difficulty, and narrates his marked success in the pages
of the _Florist and Pomologist_. He formed a very large fernery in an
old chalk-pit, and with much success; but, notwithstanding all the care
taken of the Osmundas and allied ferns, they were tried for four seasons
with no satisfactory results, the roots of the surrounding trees
robbing them of both soil and water. “A change was then made: a piece of
ground, of irregular shape, large enough to contain about 20 plants, was
staked out, and the mould, or, more correctly speaking, the chalk, was
removed to the depth of 3 ft.; a bricklayer followed, and put in a floor
of three bricks laid on the flat, set in good Portland cement, and over
that a layer of plain tiles, the sides being made up to the ground-level
with a 4½-inch wall, well built up in the same kind of cement; this made
the whole water-tight, and prevented the roots of the surrounding trees
from penetrating and robbing the ferns of their moisture. The space was
filled up with earth, compounded of good loam, peat, and leaf-mould, in
equal proportions, with about one-fifth of good rotten manure added
thereto; these ingredients were thoroughly mixed and well trodden in,
and then the ferns were planted. In forming this bed, provision was made
for the escape of the surplus water, by introducing into the front wall,
at about 4 ins. from the bottom, a common 3-in. drain-pipe, which
communicated with a small tank, about 3 ft. square, sunk into the chalk,
so that all waste water became absorbed. This method proved to be
eminently successful, the plants far surpassing in size any I have ever
seen under artificial cultivation, and, judging from report, rivalling
their growth in their natural habitats. Last season I could boast of
_Osmunda regalis_ with fronds at least 8 ft. in length, _Osmunda
spectabilis_ 4½ ft., _Osmunda Claytoniana_ 5 ft., _Osmunda cinnamomea_ 3
ft., and the beautiful _Osmunda regalis_, var. _cristata_, 3 ft. in
length. _Adiantum pedatum_ grew from 2 ft. to 3 ft. in height, and
others were proportionally fine. The plants were not drawn up by being
planted closely together, but were placed at a fair distance apart, and
became handsome and noble specimens. Every spring I apply a dressing of
about two inches of rotten manure to the surface, and just cover it with
mould for the sake of appearance. The artificial swamp is the admiration
of all the visitors here. The plants are always in a healthy and
vigorous state, and have none of that half-starved appearance so
frequently to be seen. The result of my experience induces me to believe
that a more liberal treatment would not be found objectionable in the
cultivation of many more of our native ferns. I intend making the
experiment this season, and may possibly find time to make known what
amount of success I may meet with. In concluding my remarks upon what I
may term ‘growing Osmundas under difficulties,’ I would observe that the
points to be principally attended to are--(1) a deep water-tight and
root-tight tank, the depth of which may, with advantage, be more than in
the case I have described; (2) a rich nutritious soil; (3) a reasonable
amount of water; and (4) a drain to carry off the surplus.”

=*Pæonia tenuifolia.=--A charming plant, about 1½ ft. or 2 ft. high,
with numerous upright stems almost completely hidden by the dense
finely-cut leaves, producing an effect which very much resembles that
afforded by the foliage of the Ferulas. The flowers are of a deep
crimson, or purplish-red, and about 2½ ins. broad, solitary and erect on
the tops of the stems. It does well in almost any soil or position, and
might with advantage be now and then used as an isolated specimen on
the turf.

=*Panicum altissimum.=--A very handsome hardy perennial grass, very like
_P. virgatum_, and often confounded with it, although much more elegant
in habit. It forms dense, erect tufts from 2 ft. to 6½ ft. high,
according to climate, soil, and temperature. The leaves are linear,
finely toothed, long, and arching. When in flower the plant presents a
very attractive appearance, the inflorescence consisting of very large
panicles of slender whorled branchlets covered with numerous small
spikelets of flowers, which ultimately assume a tinge of dark
chestnut-red.

=*Panicum bulbosum.=--A tall and strong species, with a free and
beautiful inflorescence. It grows about 5 ft. high, and the flowers are
very gracefully spread forth. It forms an elegant plant for the
flower-garden in which grace and variety are sought; for dotting about
here and there, near the margins of shrubberies, etc.; and for
naturalisation.

=*Panicum capillare.=--A hardy annual kind, growing in tufts from 16
ins. to 20 ins. high, and very ornamental when in full flower, the tufts
being then covered with large, pyramidal panicles, which are borne both
at the ends of the stems and in the axils of the stem-leaves. Grows in
any soil or position, and sows itself. I noticed it in great abundance
in cultivated fields in many parts of Canada and the United States. Well
suited for border beds or isolation, being one of the most graceful
plants in cultivation. It is commonly grown under the name of
_Eragrostis elegans_.

=*Panicum virgatum.=--A handsome, bold, hardy species from N. America,
growing, in good soil, to a height of nearly 3½ ft. It forms close,
compact tufts of leaves, a foot or more long, which, from July to the
first frosts, are crowned with very large, dense, branching panicles.
The general colour of the plant is a fine lively green, and its graceful
habit renders it an admirable subject for the picturesque flower-garden,
the pleasure-ground, etc., in isolated tufts. It is also fine for
borders. The best mode of multiplying it is by division in the spring,
when vegetation is just commencing.

=*Papaver bracteatum= (_Great Scarlet Poppy_).--A remarkably
vigorously-growing perennial species from Siberia and N. Russia, with
simple, rough, hairy stems more than 4 ft. high, each terminated by a
single flower 9 ins. broad, and of a bright deep brick-red colour, with
a large black spot at the base of each petal, and 2 or 3 leaf-like
bracts at the base of each flower. The radical leaves, which are very
deeply divided, form a dense broad tuft resting on the ground. A very
ornamental plant for the open parts of pleasure-grounds, flourishing in
almost any kind of well-drained soil. It will prove most effective as an
isolated plant in the rougher parts of the pleasure-ground. A plant of
it would also show to great advantage in a group of green-leaved
subjects like the Ferulas. Very closely resembling the preceding is the
Armenian species _P. orientalis_. It is however smaller in every
respect, and the flowers want the distinguishing bracts.

=Papyrus antiquorum= (_Egyptian Paper-plant_).--A very graceful reed, or
rather cyperus, which yielded the material used as paper by the ancient
Egyptians. The rootstocks spread horizontally under the mud in places
where the plant grows, continuing to throw up stems as they creep along.
These stems are triangular and grow from 3 ft. to 8 ft. high; they are
quite leafless except at the top, where they bear a large parasol-like
tuft of green, gracefully-arching filaments. Shallow parts of pieces of
water in a warm position are the most suitable places for this plant. It
may, however, also be planted in soil which is kept constantly moist.
Multiplied by division of the rootstocks; the pieces to be planted under
water, if possible. In gardens south of London this fine plant may be
tried in the open air in summer from June till September in warm spots;
if not planted in shallow water, or the artificial bog, it should
receive a very liberal supply of water in summer.

=*Paulownia imperialis.=--A Japanese tree of moderate size, with a
large, dense, spreading head, and broad, entire or lobed, opposite
leaves covered with hoary down. The flowers are nearly 2 ins. long, in
terminal panicles, and of a purplish-violet colour. Young plants, say of
a year, or in the first spring of their existence as independent plants,
will, if cut down to the ground, make a luxuriant growth during the
current year, and indeed prove more effective than the _Ferdinanda
eminens_. The stem rises quite vertically and with great vigour, and
looks simply a column of noble leaves. Plants growing in an ordinary
nursery-quarter were (Sept. 8, 1868) 7 ft. and 8 ft. high from the
ground, and the leaves from 20 ins. to 22 ins. in diameter. It was
noticeable, too, that those at the top of each shaft were as large as
those half-way up and near the base, which is not usually the case; and
of course every variation of this kind is valuable, as it helps us to
produce variety. Planted in rich ground and treated specially to secure
a subtropical effect, greater dimensions than the above may readily be
obtained, and older plants when cut down may be expected to produce
stronger stems and leaves. They should be cut down every year in winter
or spring, and confined to one stem.

=*Petasites vulgaris.=--A native plant of vigorous growth and striking
appearance, forming dense spreading tufts of enormous radical leaves,
usually about 2 ft. or 2½ ft. high. The leaves are heart-shaped in
outline, and sometimes 3 ft. in width. A suitable subject for planting
in any position where the soil is moist and deep, as on the margins of
pieces of water or in damp glades. There is a variety (_P. v. niveus_)
which has white, instead of rosy, flowers. This is also quite hardy, but
does best in a slightly shaded position in deep clayey or sandy-clay
soil.

=Phœnix dactylifera= (_Date Palm_).--A handsome palm with a rugged stem,
and pinnate dark-green leaves from 6 ft. to 12 ft. long; the divisions
linear-lance-shaped, very much pointed, and standing out quite straight.
Easily increased from seed. Suitable for the greenhouse in winter and
the open garden in summer, from the end of May till the beginning of
October. Africa and India.

=Phormium tenax= (_New Zealand Flax_).--A hardy plant, with something of
the habit of a large Iris, forming tufts of broad, shining, leathery
leaves from 5 ft. to 6½ ft. high, gracefully arching at the top. The
flowers, of a lemon colour, are borne in erect loose spikes just above
the foliage. Generally with us it will be found to enjoy greenhouse
temperature, though in genial places in the south and west of England
and Ireland it does very well in the open air. Its best use is for the
decoration of the garden in summer, a few specimens well grown and
plunged in the grass or the centre of a bed giving a most distinct
aspect to the scene. The larger such plants are, the better, of course,
will be the effect. The small ones will prove equally useful and
effective in vases, to which they will add a grace that vases rarely now
possess. It is pre-eminently useful from its being alike good for the
house, conservatory, and hall-decoration in winter. Multiplied by
division of the tufts in summer, and thriving best in a light deep soil.
Wherever indoor decoration on a large scale is practised it is
indispensable, and it should be remarked that, unless for vase
decoration, it requires to be grown into goodly specimens before
affording much effect out of doors; but when grown large in tubs, it is
equally grand for the large conservatory and for important positions in
the flower-garden. In the extreme south of England and Ireland the New
Zealand Flax will thrive in the water as well as on dry land; and where
this is the case it may of course be used with fine effect as an
aquatic. Doubtless, too, the variegated variety of the New Zealand Flax
would be a capital plant to try in the open air in nice situations in
the south and west of England and Ireland, where the green plant
sometimes does so well. In any case it will do finely out of doors for
the summer.

=*Phytolacca decandra= (_Virginian Poke_).--A vigorous herbaceous
perennial, from 5½ ft. to nearly 10 ft. high, with stems of a reddish
hue, very much branched above; the branches, leaf-stalks, veins of the
leaves, and flower-stalks being also red. The flowers are numerous, in
cylindrical spikes, and are at first white, afterwards changing to a
delicate rose-colour. In autumn the leaves change to a uniform reddish
tinge, which has a fine effect, contrasted with the numerous pendent
purple berries. This is a very hardy plant, requiring hardly any
attention and growing in almost any kind of soil. Multiplied either by
seed or by division. It forms a very free and vigorous mass of
vegetation, and, though perhaps scarcely refined enough in leaf to
justify its being recommended for flower-garden use, no plant is more
worthy of a place wherever a rich herbaceous vegetation is desired;
whether near the rougher approaches of a hardy fernery, open glades near
woodland walks, or any like positions. N. America.

=*Poa aquatica.=--A stout, rapidly increasing native grass, growing from
4 ft. to 6 ft. high, with broad, flat leaves and the inflorescence in
much-branched handsome panicles, sometimes nearly a foot long. It is not
uncommon in England and Ireland, mostly occurring in wet ditches, by
rivers, and in marshes. It is one of the boldest and handsomest hardy
grasses, for planting by the margins of pieces of artificial water or
streams, associated with such plants as the Typhas, Acorus, bullrush,
great water-dock, etc.

=*Poa fertilis.=--Just within the main entrance of the Royal Gardens at
Kew a very graceful-looking grass might have been seen isolated on the
turf during the past year or two. It is a comparatively dwarf subject,
and not at all striking in bloom like the Pampas, but withal very
distinct and desirable. It is one of the most elegant grasses, forming
dense tufts of long, soft, smooth, slender leaves, which arch outwards
and downwards in the most graceful manner on every side, and, in the
flowering season, are surmounted by airy, diffuse, purplish or
violet-tinged panicles, rising to a height of from 20 ins. to 3 ft., the
grassy tufts being usually about half that height. This plant is widely
distributed over Southern Europe, Northern Asia, and North America, in
wet meadows and on low banks of streams. Of all the dwarf perennial
grasses it is perhaps the best for isolation on the grass, where its
fine dense and graceful tufts of long hair-like leaves and elegant
panicles form a quite distinct-looking and ornamental object.

[Illustration: Poa fertilis.]

=*Polygonatum multiflorum= (_Solomon’s Seal_).--This, one of the most
graceful of our native plants, is too distinct and pleasing in aspect to
be omitted from an enumeration of ornamental subjects. It is best
suited for a shady position under trees, or the fringes of shrubberies,
or groups of tall and widely-branching plants, where its elegantly
arching stems and pretty pendent flowers would attain greatest
perfection, and exhibit a very marked contrast to the surrounding types
of vegetation. A well-drained, sandy, and peaty soil will be found to
suit it best, and it is well adapted for the wild and semi-wild parts of
the pleasure-ground. Easily multiplied by division of the rootstocks.

=*Polygonum cuspidatum= (_Sieboldi_).--Forms large and noble tufts of
lively green, which increase in beauty from year to year. It grows to a
height of 3½ ft. to 6 ft. and more, the stems being at first erect and
simple, then becoming much branched, the branches arching, and spreading
nearly horizontally at the top. The white flowers, which are disposed in
clusters forming close panicles, are succeeded by handsome rosy-white
fruit. When planted singly, and away from other subjects, its head
assumes a rather peculiar and pretty arching character; and therefore it
is not quite fit for forming centres or using in groups, so much as for
planting singly on the turf, there leaving it to take care of itself and
come up year after year. In this way it would be particularly useful in
the pleasure-ground or diversified English flower-garden. It is also
good for any position in which a bold and distinct type of vegetation is
desired, while of course, when we come to have fine groups of hardy
“foliage-plants” in our gardens, its use will be much extended. The
deeper and better the soil, the finer will its development prove. You
cannot make the soil too deep and good if you want the plant to assume a
very striking character. It runs very much at the root in all
directions horizontally just below the surface of the soil. By cutting
away the runners, and thus concentrating the sap in the central stems,
tufts have been obtained from 9 ft. to 13 ft. high, and as much across.
Japan.

=Polymnia grandis.= (See _Montagnæa heracleifolia_.)

=Polymnia pyramidalis.=--A free, bold, and tall plant, with somewhat of
a sunflower habit, but withal very fine, and making a tall green growth
by the end of July, before many other things used in this way begin to
push. The leaves are not so large as those of the other species, and
differ in shape, being nearly cordate; but the growth is vigorous, and
the habit distinct. It pushes up a narrow pyramidal head of foliage to a
height of nearly 10 ft. in Paris gardens, and will be found to do well
in the south of England. Easily multiplied in spring by division or
cuttings from plants placed in heat in January, or from seed sown in a
pot. The species _Uvedalia_ and _maculata_ are rather coarse herbaceous
plants, fitted for rough places in warm positions, and deep, rich soil.
New Granada.

=*Pontederia cordata.=--One of the handsomest water-plants in
cultivation, combining gracefulness of habit and leaf with beauty of
flower. It forms thick tufts of almost arrow-shaped, erect, long-stalked
leaves from 1½ ft. to more than 2 ft. high, crowned with the handsome
blue flower-spikes, which issue from the leafstalks just below the base
of the leaves. It should be planted in shallow pieces of water.
Multiplied by division of the tufts at any season. N. America.

=Pothos acaulis.=--A noble plant of the Arum family, with huge simple
dark-green leaves, forming a magnificent rosette. It requires stove
treatment in winter and spring, and having made its growth and been
hardened off under cover, it may be placed out in the open air in
sheltered warm places in the southern counties, from the middle of June
to the end of September. It, however, sometimes suffers from cold, and
is on the whole only likely to be of very partial use. Among the other
large Aroids which have been tried in Battersea Park, the best are
_Philodendron macrophyllum_, _P. Simsii_, and _Anthurium Hookeri_. Being
rather tender they all require a very warm and well-sheltered position.
W. Indies.

=*Rhaponticum cynaroides.=--A hardy perennial from the Pyrenees, 3 ft.
or more in height, with a rigid, simple, furrowed stem, and lobed or
entire oblong radical leaves, covered underneath with silvery down.
Flowers solitary, purple, in very large heads. It thrives in a deep,
substantial, moist, but well-drained and free soil. This and, to a
smaller extent, the following species are worthy of a place in full
collections of hardy fine-leaved plants, for borders, the margins of
groups, and, in the case of _R. cynaroides_, for isolation. Both are
easily increased by division.

=*Rhaponticum pulchrum.=--A hardy perennial from the Caucasus, with
numerous simple stems 2 ft. or more in height, and much-divided,
undulating, toothed leaves of an ashy or sea-green colour on the upper
side, and whitish underneath. The flowers are borne in small solitary
purplish heads late in summer. A very suitable subject for embellishing
dry, arid, rocky positions. _R. scariosum_ is another kind, useful for
the same purposes as the preceding species.


*THE RHUBARBS.

The Rhubarbs, from their vigour and picturesqueness, are well worthy of
cultivation among hardy, fine-leaved plants. They are so hardy that they
may be planted in any soil, and afterwards left to take care of
themselves. Their fine leaves and bold habit make them valuable
ornaments for the margins of shrubberies (the best way is to plant one
singly a few feet from the margin of the shrubbery, so that when they
die down in autumn no blank may be seen), and for semi-wild places where
a very free and luxuriant type of vegetation is desired. Though not
particular as to soil, they enjoy it when it is deep and rich, and the
more it is made so the better they will grow.

=Rheum Emodi= is undoubtedly the handsomest and most distinct of the
genus in cultivation. The figure conveys an accurate idea of the outline
of its leaves, and of its aspect when in flower. The large leaves have
their veins red, which distinguishes it from any other species. It has a
large and deep-feeding root, black on the outside, and yellow within.
The flowers are very small, of a yellowish white. It comes up somewhat
later than the common kinds, and is not by any means common, though it
may be found in botanic gardens and nurseries where collections of
herbaceous plants are formed. It may, like all the species, be increased
by division, but a young plant should not be disturbed for several years
after being planted. It is a native of Nepaul.

The palmated rhubarb, _Rheum palmatum_, is immediately distinguished
from its cultivated fellows by its leaves

[Illustration: RHEUM EMODI.

Hardy herbaceous fine-foliaged Type.]

being deeply cut into lobes. It is scarcely so ornamental or imposing as
the fuller-leaved kinds, but is an interesting plant. I have seen it
grown in some Irish gardens for culinary purposes, but do not remember
to have noticed it in English kitchen-gardens. When well grown in deep
and rather light and well-drained earth, the flowering-stem of this
species attains a height of about nine feet. It is a native of Tartary,
and well deserves a place. _Rheum Ribes_ is a somewhat delicate species,
a native of Southern Persia, which may be seen in one or two of our
botanic gardens, and more frequently in those of France; but we fear it
is not hardy enough to thrive well in these islands. The most remarkable
known species is the Himalayan (_R. nobile_), which has its flower-stems
beautifully clothed with large straw-coloured and pink-edged bracts, so
as to form what may be termed a pyramid of leaves; but, as this species
is not in cultivation, we need not describe it further. It would prove a
very welcome addition to our collection of hardy plants.

The common rhubarbs are said by some of our authorities to have chiefly
sprung from _Rheum Rhaponticum_, and some of them have also come from
the wavy-leaved Rheum (_R. undulatum_). In any case, some of the garden
varieties of rhubarb are worth planting for ornamental purposes. They
have been so planted in Hyde Park, but in masses--not the proper way to
employ them. Kinds deserving of notice are _R. australe_, _R.
compactum_, _R. rugosum_, _R. hybridum_, Victoria rhubarb (a garden
variety, with very large leaves and long red stalks), Myatt’s Linnæus,
and Prince Albert (also garden varieties, and splendid ornamental
plants). Mr. Shirley Hibberd says he has found Scott’s Monarch to be
the most imposing and ornamental of all the garden varieties.

=*Rhus Cotinus= (_Venetian Sumach_).--A bushy shrub, about 6½ ft. high,
with simple, smooth, shining green leaves, and a very remarkable
feathery inflorescence of a deep red colour. It requires a dry,
gravelly, warm soil, and will grow in the most arid positions. Where it
thrives the effect of its peculiar inflorescence is very fine and
distinct. It is used with most effect as an isolated specimen, though it
would group very well with such plants as Lindley’s Spiræa. S. Europe.

=*Rhus glabra laciniata.=--This variety of the smooth or scarlet Sumach
is a small shrub with compound leaves, growing from 4 ft. to 7 ft. high,
a native of North America, with finely-cut and elegant leaves, the
strongest being about a foot long when the plants have been established
a year or two. When seen on an established plant, these leaves combine
the beauty of those of the finest Grevillea with that of a fern frond,
while the youngest and unfolding leaves remind one of the aspect of a
finely-cut umbelliferous plant in spring. The variety observable in the
shape, size, and aspect of the foliage makes the plant charming to look
upon, while the midribs of the fully-grown leaves are red, and in autumn
the whole glow off into bright colour after the fashion of American
shrubs and trees. During the entire season it is presentable, and there
is no fear of any vicissitude of weather injuring it. Its great merit is
that, in addition to being so elegant in foliage, it has a very dwarf
habit, and is thoroughly hardy. Plants three years old and undisturbed
for the last two years are not more

[Illustration: RHUS GLABRA LACINIATA.

Hardy deciduous Shrub Section.]

than eighteen inches high. The heads of some are branched, but these are
not less elegant than when in a simple-stemmed state, so that here we
have clearly a subject that will afford a charming fern-like effect in
the full sun, and add graceful verdure and distinction to the
flower-garden. When the flowers show after the plant is a few years old,
they may be pinched off; but this need only be practised in the case of
permanent groups or plantings of it. To produce the effect of a
Grevillea or a fern on a small scale, we should of course keep this
graceful Rhus small and propagate it like a bedding-plant. Like most
other shrubs, it has a tendency to branch; but to fully enjoy the beauty
of the leaves it is best to cut down the plants yearly, as then the
leaves given off from the simple erect stem are much larger and more
graceful. It will, however, be necessary to allow it to become
established before treating it in this way, as it is at present
comparatively new to our gardens. The figure, sketched early in August,
represents a young plant little more than a foot high, which had been
cut down to the ground during the spring of the past year, and proves
that its full beauty may be enjoyed in a very small state. It may be
most tastefully used in association with bedding-plants, or on banks in
or near the rock-garden or hardy fernery, planting it in light sandy
loam. The graceful mixtures and bouquet-*like beds that might be made
with the aid of such plants need not be suggested here, while of course
an established plant, or groups of three, might well form the centre of
a bed. Planting a very small bed or group separately in the
flower-garden, and many other uses which cannot be enumerated here, will
occur to those who have once tried it. Some hardy plants of fine
foliage are either so rampant or so topheavy that they cannot be wisely
associated with bedding-plants. This is, on the contrary, as tidy and
tractable a grower as the most fastidious could desire. It would be a
mistake to put such a pretty plant under or near rough trees and shrubs.
Give it the full sun, and good free soil.

=*Rhus vernicifera= is distinct from the preceding, and has fine leaves.
It is a native of Japan, and the source of the best Japan varnish
according to Thunberg. Useful for grouping with the preceding or other
hardy shrubs of like character.

=*Ricinus communis= (_Castor-oil Plant_).--When well grown in the open
air, there is not in the whole range of cultivated plants a more
imposing subject than this. It may have been seen nearly 12 ft. high in
the London parks of late years, and with leaves nearly 1 yd. wide. It is
true we require a bed of very rich deep earth under it to make it attain
such dimensions and beauty; but in all parts, and with ordinary
attention, it grows well. In warm countries, in which the plant is very
widely cultivated, it becomes a small tree, but is much prettier in the
state in which it is seen with us--_i.e._, with an unbranched stem
clothed from top to bottom with noble leaves. Soon after it betrays, a
tendency to develope side-shoots the cold autumn comes and puts an end
to all further progress; and so much the better, because it is much
handsomer in a simple-stemmed state than any other. The same is true of
not a few other large-leaved plants--once they break into a number of
side-shoots their leaf beauty is to a great extent lost. It is as easily
raised from seed as the common bean, requiring, however, to be raised
in heat. It should be sown about the middle of February, and the plants
gradually hardened off so as to be fit to put out by the middle of May.
The Ricinus is a grand plant for making bold and noble beds near those
of the more brilliant flowers, and tends to vary the flower-garden
finely. It is not well to associate it closely with bedding-plants, in
consequence of the strong growth and shading power of the leaves, so to
speak. A good plan is to make a compact group of the plant in the centre
of some wide circular bed and surround it with a band of a dwarfer
subject, say the Aralia or Caladium, and then finish with whatever
arrangement of the flowering plants may be most admired. A bold and
striking centre may be obtained, while the effect of the flowers is much
enhanced, especially if the planting be nicely graduated and tastefully
done. For such groups the varieties of the Castor-oil plant are not
likely to be surpassed. East Indies.

The most notable varieties are _R. c. sanguineus_, the stem,
leaf-stalks, young leaves, and fruit of which are of a blood-red colour;
_R. c. borboniensis_, which in southern climates often attains the
extraordinary height of 26 ft. in one year; _R. c. giganteus_, a very
tall kind from the Philippine Islands.

Other kinds in cultivation are _R. Belot Desfougerès_ (a very tall and
branching kind), _R. viridis_ (of a uniform lively green colour), _R.
insignis_, _R. africanus_, _R. africanus albidus_, _R. minor_, _R.
hybridus_, _R. microcarpus_.

The better and richer the soil, and the warmer the position, the more
vigorous will be the growth of any of the above. Copious watering in
summer is indispensable.

=*Rumex Hydrolapathum.=--A very large native water-plant of a size and
habit sufficiently striking to entitle it to a place amongst ornamental
subjects by the water-side. The radical long-stalked leaves, which are
sometimes 2 ft. or more in length, form erect tufts of a very imposing
character. The flowering-stem is frequently 6 ft. in height, and bears a
very large, dense, pyramidal panicle of a reddish or olive-fawn colour.
The plant is most effective in autumn, when the leaves change to a lurid
red colour, which they retain for some time.

=*Saccharum ægyptiacum.=--A vigorous perennial grass, forming ample
tufts of reed-like downy stems 6½ ft. to 13 ft. high, and clothed with
very graceful foliage, well adapted for ornamenting the margins of
pieces of water, the slopes and other parts of pleasure-grounds, etc.,
in a warm position. In our climate it does not flower, but even without
its fine feathery plumes it is a pretty plant from its foliage and habit
alone. Easily and quickly multiplied by division in spring; the offsets
to be started in a frame or pit. When established they may be planted
out in May or June. N. Africa.

=*Sagittaria sagittifolia.=--A British water-plant, affording the most
remarkable example of the arrow-shaped leaf to be met with among hardy
plants. These leaves stand erect, from 1 ft. to 1½ ft. above the water,
and from the middle of the tuft the flowering-stem rises in August to
the height of 1½ ft. to 2½ ft. The flowers are of a pale rosy-white
colour. There is a variety with double flowers (_S. sagittifolia flore
pleno_), which resemble the flowers of the double Rocket. Both the
double and single kinds should have a place among water or bog plants.

[Illustration: SEAFORTHIA ELEGANS.

Conservatory Palm; standing well in the open air in summer.]

=*Salvia argentea= (_S. patula_).--A handsome biennial about 3½ ft.
high, forming broad spreading rosettes of large, oval, heart-shaped
leaves, densely covered with long silky hairs of a silvery whiteness,
and bearing large panicles of white flowers. An excellent subject for
grouping on grass-plats or the uneven parts of pleasure-grounds. Where
the effect of the foliage only is desired the flower-stems should be
pinched off as soon as they appear; the leaves will then preserve their
freshness and silvery colour throughout the year. A light, sandy, or
gravelly soil is the most suitable. Easily propagated by sowing in
autumn, and keeping the seedlings in a cold frame through the winter,
giving them air as often as possible, and watering very moderately. This
plant is most effective during its first summer, and before it makes an
attempt to flower. S. Europe.

=*Scirpus lacustris= (_Bulrush_).--This giant rush sends up numerous
smooth green stems as thick as the finger at the base, and from 3 ft. to
8 ft. high. In still water the bases of these are covered with leafless
sheaths, but in running water the uppermost sheath produces at its
extremity a leaf of several inches in length, in addition to which
numerous barren tufts of leaves, often of great length, and resembling
those of _Sparganium affine_, are also produced. When in flower, the
stems are crowned with short, umbel-like, chestnut-coloured panicles. It
is very effective on the margins of lakes or streams, associated with
other tall and imposing aquatic plants.

=Seaforthia elegans.=--One of the most beautiful of the Palm family,
from the northern parts of Australia, where it attains a height of about
30 ft., but in this country seldom arrives at more than half its full
size. The leaves are from 2 ft. to 10 ft. in length, and are divided
into numerous narrow leaflets from 1 ft. to 1½ ft. long, and of a dark
green colour. The whole plant is perfectly smooth, and is one of the
finest subjects in cultivation for the conservatory, greenhouse, or
subtropical garden. It may be placed in the open air from the middle or
end of May until the beginning of October. It is too scarce as yet to be
procurable by horticulturists generally, but should be looked for by all
who take an interest in these matters and have a house in which to grow
it. It stands well in the conservatory during the winter, though
generally kept in the stove, where of course it grows beautifully. There
are hardier kinds--the dwarf Fan-palm for example--but on the whole none
of them are so valuable as this.

=Senecio Ghiesbreghtii.=--A handsome Mexican plant with stout, round,
spotted stems, 3 to 4 ft. high, and large oval-oblong, thick,
coarsely-toothed leaves of a light green colour, and slightly rolled
down at the margin. Flowers small, yellow, very numerous, in corymbose
clusters of enormous size. A useful plant for isolation on grass-plats,
or for beds, etc. Young plants are to be preferred for this purpose, as
the old ones are apt to become bare and ragged-looking at the base.
Plant in a mixture of peat soil and free loam at the end of May.
Multiplied by cuttings in winter, struck under glass in a temperate heat
in early spring.

=Senecio Petasites= (_Cineraria platanifolia_).--Another Mexican
species, nearly 3½ ft. high, with a stout, half-shrubby,
slightly-branching stem, and large, dark-green, roughish, lobed leaves.
It requires a substantial, but free and cool soil, and may be multiplied
at almost any season by cuttings. It requires greenhouse protection in
winter, grows freely in the open air planted out in early summer, and is
suitable for beds or groups associated with the medium-sized subjects.

=*Seseli gummiferum.= (_Silvery Seseli_).--An umbelliferous plant with
elegantly-divided leaves of a peculiarly pleasing glaucous or almost
silvery tone. I am not sure whether this plant is perennial or not, and
it is not hardy on cold soils, having perished during several of our
most severe winters, but it is so unique in its way that some persons
might like to grow it, and if so the best position is on dry and sunny
banks, or raised beds or borders. It is one of the few subjects that are
at once fern-like and silvery, and if plentiful enough might be used to
form charming edgings. It is not difficult to raise from seed, which
should be sown soon after being gathered. As it is liable to perish in
winter, perhaps the best way to deal with it would be to put it out
annually at the end of spring, raising it and keeping it in frames for
this purpose; and to secure seeds a few plants might be left in 10 in.
or 12 in. pots, so that the seed might be gathered under cover.
Doubtless, however, continental raisers can supply it. S. Russia.

=*Silphium integrifolium.=--This composite has a rough, vigorous, rigid,
slightly four-angled, grooved stem, from 2 ft. to 4 ft. high, and leaves
from 3 ins. to 5 ins. long, all opposite, lanceolate-ovate, entire,
tapering to a sharp point from a roundish heart-shaped and
partly-clasping base, and covered with a roughish down. The
flower-heads are of a greenish-yellow, on short stalks, in a close,
forking corymb. A variety (_S. læve_) has the leaves and stem smooth, or
nearly so. This and the following kinds are only suited for the rougher
parts of the pleasure-ground, and by wood-walks, etc.; they will be seen
to greatest advantage in rich and deep soil, but will grow in any kind.
Division. N. America.

=*Silphium laciniatum= (_Compass-plant_).--A vigorous perennial with a
stout, round stem, often upwards of 8 ft. in height. The leaves, which
are collected chiefly about the base of the plant, are large, wrinkled,
and deeply-divided into lance-shaped, pointed segments, and fringed with
white hairs. The stem-leaves are few, much smaller, and opposite.
Flowers of a fine yellow with a brownish centre, in large, few,
solitary, short-stalked, horizontal or drooping heads, which have the
peculiarity of facing to the east. Division. N. America.

=*Silphium perfoliatum= (_Cup-plant_).--A robust-growing North American
perennial from 4 ft. to 8 ft. in height, with a square stem and broad,
opposite, oval, lance-shaped, coarsely toothed leaves, 6 ins. to 15 ins.
long, rough on both sides, the upper ones united at their bases; the
lower ones abruptly narrowed into winged leaf-stalks, which are also
united at their bases. Flower-heads about 2 ins. across, with a
greenish-yellow disk and a yellow ray. Does best in a deep, free,
well-drained, sandy soil, but will grow well when the ground is slightly
moist, especially in warm, but not too shady, positions. Division.

=*Silphium terebinthinaceum= (_Prairie-Dock_).--A large kind with smooth
slender stems from 4 ft. to 10 ft. high, panicled at the summit, and
bearing many small heads of light yellow flowers. The leaves are
ovate-oblong, thick and rough, especially beneath, and from 1 ft. to 2
ft. long, on slender stalks. A variety (_pinnatifidum_) has the leaves
deeply cut or pinnatifid. This species is remarkable for its strong
turpentine odour. Division. N. America.

=*Silphium trifoliatum.=--This species has a smooth, often glaucous,
rather slender stem, from 4 ft. to 6 ft. high, branching above. Leaves
lance-shaped, pointed, entire or scarcely serrate, short-stalked, in
whorls of three or four, the uppermost ones opposite. Flower-heads
yellow, more than 2 ins. across, on long stalks, and forming loose
panicles. Division. N. America.

=*Silybum marianum= (_Milk-thistle_).--A very robust and
vigorous-growing native biennial, 5 ft. or more in height, of strikingly
handsome appearance, and well deserving to be associated with other
large fine-foliaged plants. Its leaves are of very great size, variously
cut and undulated, tipped and margined with scattered spines, and of a
bright glistening green colour marbled and variegated with broad white
veins. Easily raised from seed, and thrives in almost any kind of
well-drained soil. Additional vigour and development may be thrown into
the foliage by pinching off the flower-stems on their first appearance.
If a few plants are raised in the garden and planted out in rough and
somewhat bare places or banks, etc., this will soon establish itself
permanently.

=Silybum eburneum= is a more tender species, very closely resembling the
above, but with spines which appear as if made of ivory. It is also more
constantly biennial, and in consequence its leaves are almost always in
the rosette stage throughout the first year. It is somewhat tenderer
than _S. marianum_. Algeria.

=The Solanums.=--This family, so wonderfully varied, affords numerous
species that look graceful and imposing in leaf when in a young and
free-growing state. In selecting examples from this great genus we must
be careful, as our climate is a shade too cold for some of the kinds
grown on the continent, and many of them are of too ragged an aspect to
be tolerated in a tasteful garden. Half a dozen species or so are
indispensable, but there is quite a crowd of narrow-leaved and ignoble
ones which may well be passed over.

Most of these plants may be raised from seed, while they are also freely
grown from cuttings, which struck in February will make good plants by
May. All the kinds named are suitable for association with the
larger-leaved plants, though they do not as a rule attain such height
and vigorous development as those of the first rank, like the Ricinus.
As a rule, temperate-house treatment in winter is required, and they
should be planted out about the middle or end of May, in rich fight
soil, a warm position, and perfect shelter. _S. marginatum_, planted in
a very dwarf and young state, furnishes a most distinct and charming
effect: it should be planted rather thinly, so that the leaves of one
plant may not brush against those of another. If some very dwarf plants
are used as a groundwork, so much the better; but the downy and silvery
leaves of this plant are sure to please without this aid. It is very
much better when thus grown than when permitted to assume the bush form.

=Solanum betaceum.=--A small tree from South

[Illustration: SOLANUM ROBUSTUM.

Tender Section; making vigorous growth during the summer months.]

America, which in our climate attains a height of nearly 10 ft. if taken
up in autumn and kept through the winter in a house. The stems are
stout, smooth, and fleshy. The leaves, which resemble those of the Beet,
are of an oval, pointed shape, and of a deep green colour, tinged with
violet in the variety _purpureum_. The flowers are small, rose-colour,
in pendent cyme-like clusters, and are succeeded by fruit of the shape
and size of a fowl’s egg, which become of a fine deep scarlet colour
during the winter. Some varieties have flowers tinged with purple and
fruit striped with brown. May be placed to great advantage in groups in
round beds with dwarfer plants or shrubs at the base, or with climbing
plants ascending the stems, but is much better isolated on slopes, etc.
It is a vigorous grower, and should have rich soil.

=Solanum crinitipes.=--A slow-growing woody species with undivided oval
leaves somewhat more than a foot long: the young stems and flower-stalks
being densely covered with chaffy hairs somewhat like those of a fern.
This I have not seen thrive so well in England as the preceding kind,
but it is well worthy of trial in full collections in the southern
counties. S. America.

=Solanum crinitum.=--A vigorous-growing species from Guiana, 5 ft. or
more in height, with stout stems, set with short strong spines and dense
long hairs. It has very large, soft, hairy, spreading, roundish leaves,
which in good soil attain a length of 2½ ft.: the upper surface of a
tender green colour with violet veinings set with spines, as are also
the leaf-stalks; the under side whitish and more thickly furnished with
spines. The hairs and bark on the upper portion of each petiole are of a
purplish hue, and, on the lower part, of a light pale green, by which
the plant may be readily recognised. The flowers are very large and
white. Berries roundish, villose, and twice or thrice as large as a
cherry. This I have seen attain a very remarkable development in
sheltered warm spots in the south of England. It is fine in medium-sized
groups.

=Solanum hyporhodium.=--A fine branching kind from Venezuela, with a
stout stem about 5 ft. high, and branches armed with short
thinly-scattered spines. The leaves, which attain a length of nearly 2½
ft., are oval, with angular sinuated lobes, the upper surface being of a
fine green colour with white veins, and the under side of a violet-red
and downy. When young the hue of the leaves is exceedingly lively. The
flowers are borne in almost lateral cymes and are of a rosy-white colour
with yellow stamens. This plant is sometimes sold as _S. discolor_ and
_S. purpureum_, but is quite distinct from them.

=Solanum Karstenii.=--This, which is more commonly known as _S.
callicarpum_, is a robust, slightly branching, arborescent shrub about 5
ft. high, covered with long hairs interspersed with spines and of a
general variable greyish-violet hue. The leaves are oval, broad,
angular, heart-shaped at the base, and 2 ft. or more in length. The
flowers are large, of a fine delicate violet colour, and borne in
crowded, almost one-sided clusters. This plant is best isolated, as when
placed in close groups the leaves of the associated subjects are apt to
tear it. Venezuela.

=Solanum lanceolatum.=--This is the best kind for blooming qualities.
The foliage, which is somewhat fluffy and willow-like, possesses no
marked character, but the mauve-coloured flowers are borne abundantly
in clusters, each containing 20 or more blooms: the stamens, being of an
orange colour, add to the effect. There are a dozen or more species that
flower freely but have little beauty of leaf: among the best of these is
_S. Rantonnettii_, which has very pretty dark-purple flowers, more than
an inch across, with an orange centre. It forms a neat bush, and flowers
freely in the southern counties, in warm sunny spots and on light soils.
Mexico.

=Solanum macranthum.=--A fine species from Brazil, confessedly one of
the best kinds in cultivation, and somewhat resembling _Polymnia
grandis_. It grows nearly 7 ft. high in one year, with a stout, simple,
spiny stem of a deep shining green with grayish spots, and sparsely
armed with very strong shortish spines. The leaves are elegant and
deeply cut, some of them over 2½ ft. long, falling gracefully
earthwards, of a light green on the upper surface, with red veinings,
the under side having a reddish hue. The flowers, seldom seen with us,
are of a fine violet colour, and grow in corymbs. It will not attain its
full character and large dimensions in cold places, and should therefore
have as warm positions as possible. Increased by cuttings struck in
February: they are fit to plant out in May.

=Solanum marginatum.=--A vigorous-growing, erect, branching and bushy
species from Abyssinia, 3 ft., or more, in height. The leaves are
somewhat oval, with a bluntly sinuated margin; the upper surface smooth,
of a brilliant green with a white silvery border, and the under side
covered with a white satiny down. The flowers are white, with orange
stamens, pendulous, very numerous, in clusters. For the positions
suited to this plant see the introductory remarks on the genus.

=Solanum Quitoense.=--A half-shrubby native of Peru and the
neighbourhood of Quito, seldom growing higher than 3¼ ft. in
cultivation. The stem is spineless, covered with a soft down, and of a
delicate green colour suffused with violet, which exhibits iridescent
changes. The leaves are broad, stalked, obcordate, with toothed angles,
and of a fine green colour, with violet downy veins. Flowers rather
large, white, tinged with lilac on the top when in bud, in short
clusters. It requires a warm position and a warm season to bring out its
best qualities.

=Solanum robustum.=--A Brazilian species with a vigorous much-branching
stem more than 3 ft. high, and furnished with very sharp and strong
spines and densely-set, long, reddish, viscous hairs. The leaves, which
are very large, are of a rich brown colour on the upper surface and
oval-elliptical in form, with 8 or 9 oval-acute lobes, the upper ones
nearly triangular; and the midrib and principal veins, which are of a
brown colour, are closely set with spines similar to those on the stem.
The flowers are white, with orange stamens, and are borne in unilateral
clusters. The berries are round, of a brown colour, and the size of a
small cherry. As a foliage-plant this is a subject of considerable
merit, and one of those most suitable for our climate. It requires a
warm sunny aspect in a position which will be at the same time airy and
sheltered from strong winds.

=Solanum Sieglingii.=--A large and handsome kind, which forms a small
tree about 13 ft. high after some

[Illustration: SOLANUM WARSCEWICZII.

Tender Section; making noble leaves in the open garden in summer.]

years’ growth. The foliage is of a light-green colour, tinged here and
there with rose, and sparsely armed with spines; the young unfolded
leaves are slightly tinged with violet. Flowers numerous, small and
white, appearing when the plant is two or three years old. A good kind
which has been little tried in England. Venezuela.

=Solanum Warscewiczii.=--A very fine and ornamental kind, resembling _S.
macranthum_, but with a lower and more thickset habit, and branching
more at the base. The leaf-stalks also, and upper branches, are of a red
colour, glandular, and scaly; and the flowers are white and small. The
stem is armed with strong slightly recurved spines, and both the stems
and the petioles of the leaves are covered with a very dense crop of
short stiff brown hairs scarcely rising above the skin. This is one of
the handsomest and best kinds we have.

=Sonchus laciniatus.=--A very graceful composite plant, from Madeira,
with a stout stem, growing to a height of more than 5 ft., and large
deeply-cut leaves with linear-lance-shaped segments. Flower-heads
yellow. When grouped on grass-plats, or open spaces in pleasure-grounds,
the fine foliage of this plant is seen to very great advantage; but
being so slender and delicate the plants must be placed where they may
be seen. It should be planted out at the end of May, and thrives best in
rich, substantial soil, in a warm sunny position. Very numerous
varieties, with the leaves variously divided and of various shades of
green, have been advertised in catalogues under specific names, as _S.
lyratus_, _S. gummiferus_, etc., etc. Many of these are quite as
charming as the type, and are well adapted for the same uses.

=*Sorghum halepense.=--A handsome hardy grass from S. Europe, N. Africa,
and Syria, with an erect stem about 3½ ft. high, and broad flat leaves
more than 1 ft. long, chiefly collected round the base of the plant. It
is most attractive when in flower in the end of summer, the
inflorescence consisting of a dense panicle of purplish awned flowers.
Suitable for isolation, groups, or borders.

=Sparmannia africana.=--A beautiful flowering stove-shrub from 3 ft. to
12 ft. high, very much resembling a Malva in habit, with long-stalked,
heart-shaped, lobed leaves, clothed with soft down, and numerous pretty
white flowers produced in stalked umbels. It thrives freely in the open
air in the south of England, from the end of May to October, if planted
in rich light soil and in warm positions. Cape of Good Hope.

=*Spiræa Aruncus.=--This is a remarkably handsome and effective plant,
from 3½ ft. to 5 ft. high, with elegantly-divided leaves, which bear
some resemblance to the fronds of certain ferns. The flowers are white,
and are disposed above the foliage in graceful, airy plumes. A cool,
peaty soil, and a slightly-shaded position, are best suited for this
plant, and it may be placed with advantage on slopes with a north
aspect, the banks of streams or pieces of water, in glades, and
thinly-planted shrubberies, etc. Division. Siberia.

=*Spiræa Filipendula.=--A hardy, native perennial, with elegant foliage
and handsome flowers. The leaves are mostly radical, very finely cut,
and form a loosely-spreading rosette. The flower-stems rise to a height
of 1½ ft. to 2 ft., and are terminated by dense panicles of rosy-white
flowers. There is a fine variety with double flowers. This plant is
included here only in consequence of the resemblance of its leaves to a
pinnate-leaved fern. By pinching off the flowers it may be used with
good effect as a green, fern-like edging plant, and it is pretty in
borders. Division in winter or spring.

=*Spiræa (Hoteia) japonica.=--A handsome, herbaceous perennial, forming
rich tufts of dark shining green much-divided leaves, which have a
somewhat fern-like appearance. These tufts are usually from a foot to 16
ins. high. The flowers are very freely produced in graceful panicles, of
which the bracts, little flower-stems, and all the ramifications are,
like the flowers, white. It is particularly fond of a sandy peat, or
very sandy loam, a sheltered position, and moist soil. Multiplied by
division of the tufts in spring or the end of summer. Japan.

=*Spiræa Lindleyana.=--A graceful shrub, with erect stems, from 6½ ft.
to nearly 10 ft. high, and large compound leaves, with finely-toothed
leaflets. Flowers late in summer, white, in very large and handsome
terminal panicles. This well-known plant is second to none for its grace
and distinctness, both of foliage and flower. It is a native of the
Himalayas, and easily procured in our nurseries; it should receive far
more attention than the majority of our shrubs do, and should be
employed both in a young and fully-grown state in and near the
flower-garden. Few things, tender or hardy, known in our gardens, afford
a better effect than may be obtained from this.

It is probably one of those plants which would look exceedingly
effective if trained to a single stem and cut down every year, as
recommended for the Ailantus and the Paulownia; but I have had no
experience of it in this way, and its natural habit is sufficiently
graceful.

=Stadmannia Jonghei.=--A tall and stately foliage-plant from Australia,
where it attains the dimensions of a small tree, with dark shining green
pinnate leaves; the divisions oblong-pointed, with serrated margins, and
of a paler colour underneath. Bears the open air of the southern
counties in summer well, if placed in sunny and sheltered spots.

=*Statice latifolia.=--A hardy and very ornamental herbaceous perennial
from Russia, with broad leaves, which form a rosette or tuft more or
less spreading. The flower-stem is more than 2 ft. high, and very much
branched; the branches commencing at from 4 ins. to 8 ins. above the
ground, and forming a large and exceedingly handsome panicle of flowers
of a light-blue colour, tinged with the greyish hue of the numerous
membranous bracts and thin dry calyces. A well-drained, sandy soil, in
an open sunny position, is the best for this plant, which, however,
grows in any ordinary garden-soil, and is admirably adapted for
naturalisation or grouping with the acanthuses, tritomas, etc., the
effect of the inflorescence being very remarkable.

=*Stipa pennata= (_Feather-grass_).--This plant, which at other times is
hardly to be distinguished from a strong, stiff tuft of common grass,
presents, in May and June, a very different appearance, the tuft being
then surmounted by numerous flower-stems, nearly 2 ft. high, gracefully
arching, and densely covered, for a considerable part of their upper
extremity, with long, twisted, feathery awns. It loves a deep, sandy
loam, and may be used with fair effect in groups of small plants, or
isolated; but its flowers continue too short a time in bloom to make it
very valuable away from borders.

=*Struthiopteris germanica.=--One of the most elegant hardy ferns, with
fronds resembling ostrich-plumes in shape, nearly 3 ft. long, and
arranged in a somewhat erect, vase-like rosette. It is particularly
suited for the embellishment of the slopes of pleasure-grounds,
cascades, grottoes, and rough rockwork, the margins of streams and
pieces of water, and will thrive in moist and deep sandy soil, either in
the full sunshine or in the shade. _S. pennsylvanica_ very closely
resembles _S. germanica_, the chief point of difference being the
narrowness of the fertile fronds of the former species. Both kinds will
prove very effective in adding beauty of form to a garden, and should by
no means be confined to the fernery proper. Central Europe.

=*Tamarix.=--These very elegant hardy shrubs may be used with excellent
effect in the flower-garden and pleasure-ground, though they are at
present seldom employed in these places. _T. gallica_ or _anglica_ is
found apparently wild in several parts of the south of England, and
other kinds, such as _germanica_, _parviflora_, _tetrandra_,
_spectabilis_, and _indica_, are also in cultivation. In the
neighbourhood of Paris _T. indica_ thrives very freely, and forms
beautiful hedges, but is cut down by frost during some winters. It would
probably do better in the south of England. The plants have minute
leaves and very elegantly-panicled branches, which gives them a feathery
effect, somewhat like that of the most graceful conifers, and, if
possible, more elegant: the roseate panicles of small flowers are also
very pretty. A finer effect would be obtained from these shrubs by
isolating them on the grass than in any other way.

=*Tanacetum vulgare var. crispum.=--A very elegant variety of the common
tansy, much dwarfer in stature, and with smaller emerald-green leaves,
which are very elegantly cut, and have a crisped or frizzled appearance.
It is quite hardy, and forms an effective ornament on the margins of
shrubberies, near rockwork, etc. It does best fully exposed, and
probably the only way in which it can be benefited after planting--in
deep and rather moist soil it does best, but will grow “anywhere”--is by
thinning out the shoots in spring, so that each remaining one shall have
free room to suspend its exquisite leaves; thinned thus, it looks much
better than when the stems are crowded, and of course, if it is done in
time, they individually attain more strength and dignity. The flowers
should be pinched off before they open. Britain.

=Thalia dealbata.=--This is one of the finest aquatic plants which we
can employ in the embellishment of pieces of water, streams, etc. In a
warm and sheltered position, and on a substantial and rich bottom, it
grows vigorously, sometimes attaining a height of 6 ft. The best mode of
growing it is in pots or tubs pierced with holes, in a mixture of stiff
peat and clayey soil, with a portion of river-mud and sand. In winter
these pots or tubs may be submerged to a greater depth, and the plants
be thus effectually protected. It would not attain the above size out of
doors except in warm places in the southern counties, in which it might
be planted out directly without taking the precautions above described.
It is generally grown in the stove in this country. N. America.

=*Thalictrum minus.=--One of the most elegant-leaved of our native
plants, forming compact, roundish bushes, from a foot to 18 ins. high,
very symmetrical, and of a slightly glaucous hue. It may be grown in any
soil, and requires only one little attention, namely, to pinch off the
slender flower-stems that appear in May and June. Not alone in its
aspect, as a little bushy tuft, does it resemble the “Maidenhair Fern,”
as _Adiantum cuneatum_ is often called, but the leaves are almost pretty
enough to pass, when mingled with flowers, for those of the fern; they
are also stiffer and more lasting than fern-leaves, and are well suited
for mingling with vases of flowers, etc. There are probably several
“forms” or varieties of this plant. It would look very pretty isolated
in large tufts as an edging, or in borders, or in groups of dwarf
subjects. Easily increased by division.

=*The Tritomas.=--So hardy, so magnificent in colouring, and so fine in
form are these plants, that we can no more dispense with their use in
the garden where beauty of form as well as colour is to prevail, than we
can with the noble Pampas grass. They are more conspicuously beautiful,
when other things begin to succumb before the gusts and heavy rains of
autumn, than any plants which flower in the bright days of midsummer. It
is not alone as component parts of large ribbon-borders and in such
positions that these grand plants are useful, but in almost any part of
the garden. Springing up as a bold, close group on the green turf, and
away from brilliant surroundings, they are more effective than when
associated with bedding plants; and of course many such spots may be
found for them near the margins of the shrubberies in most
pleasure-grounds. It is in an isolated group, flaming up amid the
verdure of trees and shrubs and grass, that their dignified aspect and
brilliant colour are seen to best advantage. However, tastefully
disposed in the flower-garden, they will prove generally useful, and
particularly for association with the finer autumn-flowering herbaceous
plants. A most satisfactory result may be produced by associating the
Tritomas with the Pampas grass and the two Arundos, the large _Statice
latifolia_, and the strong and beautiful autumn-flowering _Anemone
japonica alba_, which is peculiarly suited for association with hardy
herbaceous plants of fine habit, and should be in every garden where a
hardy flower is valued.

The Tritomas are not fastidious as to soil, and with a little
preparation of the ground may be grown almost anywhere. They thrive with
extraordinary vigour and freedom where the soil is very sandy as well as
rich and deep, and are readily multiplied by division.

As every garden should be embellished by well-developed specimens or
groups of these fine plants, those who have very poor and thin, or pure
clay soils, would do well to excavate the ground to the depth of 2 ft.
or 3 ft., and fill in with good rich loam. When the soil is deep, no
watering will be required.

=*Tritoma Burchelli.=--This kind is distinguished by the lighter green
of its leaves, by its black-spotted flower-stem, and especially by the
colour of its flowers, which are crimson at the base, passing into
carmine in the middle, and pale-yellow or greenish at the tips. There
is a variety which has the leaves variegated or striped with white, but
it is somewhat tender and rare.

=*Tritoma glauca.=--A dwarfer kind than _T. Uvaria_, with leaves of a
sea-green colour, and very large spikes of scarlet-and-yellow flowers,
which, when in bud, are hidden by long, sea-green bracts, streaked and
rayed with white. There is a scarce variety with recurved leaves (_T. g.
recurvata_), which has somewhat of the habit of a Bromelia. S. Africa.

=*Tritoma præcox.=--A recently-introduced, handsome, hardy perennial,
with very much the habit of _T. Uvaria_. The flower-stem grows from 20
ins. to 2 ft. high, and the flowers, which are produced about the middle
of May, are of a bright-red colour when exposed to the full sun, and of
a bright-yellow when grown in the shade. The leaves are fully 2 ft.
long, sharply keeled, and with toothed edges. S. Africa.

=*Tritoma Uvaria.=--A very ornamental and well-known kind from S.
Africa, forming thick tufts of linear, erect leaves. It is a vigorous
grower, and small specimens have been known in three years to form tufts
from 3 ft. to 4 ft. through, bearing from 50 to 100 flower-spikes. The
flowering-stems are about 3¼ ft. in height, and the flowers are borne in
dense conical clusters at the top. The upper part of the cluster,
containing the young flowers, is of a coral-red colour, the lower part
yellow, all the flowers gradually changing to this colour. Other
varieties in cultivation are--_T. U. grandis_ or _grandiflora_, which is
much taller than the preceding kind, with stouter stems and larger
flower-spikes; _T. U. Rooperi_, which only differs from the type in
being somewhat dwarfer in habit and having softish or flaccid leaves,
frequently falling forward; it also flowers later; and _T. U.
Lindleyana_, which has erect, very rigid leaves, and more
deeply-coloured flowers than the type.

=Tupidanthus calyptratus.=--A noble subtropical plant from Bengal,
standing in the open air from the beginning of June till October without
the slightest injury. The leaves are large, deeply-divided, and of a
dark shining green colour. It requires stove treatment in winter and
spring, and is suitable for beds or planting singly.

=*Typha latifolia= (_Reed-Mace_).--A native aquatic plant, growing in
tufts of 2-rowed flat leaves from 1½ ft. to 2 ft. long, and 1 in. or 1½
in. wide. From the centre of each tuft springs a stem 6 ft. or 7 ft.
high, which in the flowering season is terminated by a close cylindrical
spike 9 ins. long, and of a dark-olive colour, changing to a
brownish-black as it ripens. This is one of the most striking and
ornamental of our British water-plants, and may be used with excellent
effect grouped with such subjects as the Great Water-Dock.

=*Typha angustifolia= resembles the preceding species in all respects
except in the size of its leaves and spike. The leaves are about ½ in.
wide and the spike about ½ in. in diameter, and something shorter than
that of _T. latifolia_. Of the two it is perhaps the more graceful in
aspect.

=Uhdea bipinnatifida.=--This is one of the most useful plants in its
class, producing a rich mass of handsome leaves, with somewhat the
aspect of those of the great cow-parsnips, but of a more refined type.
The foliage has a slightly silvery tone, and the plant continues to grow
fresh and vigorously till late in autumn. It is well suited for forming
rich masses of foliage, not so tall, however, as those formed by such
things as Ricinus or Ferdinanda. It is freely propagated by cuttings
taken from old plants kept in a cool stove, greenhouse, or pit during
the winter months, and placed in heat to afford cuttings freely in early
spring. Under ordinary cutting treatment on hotbeds or in a moist warm
propagating house, it grows as freely as could be desired, and may be
planted out at the end of May or the beginning of June. Mexico.

[Illustration: Uhdea bipinnatifida.]



=Uhdea pyramidata.=--This kind has been less cultivated in England than
the preceding, from which it is distinct in appearance. It is of a
lighter and fresher green, and inclined to grow larger in habit, having
more of the aspect of a Malva in foliage. Useful for the same purposes
as the preceding kind, but not so valuable.

=*Veratrum album= (_White Hellebore_).--A handsome, erect perennial of
pyramidal habit, 3½ ft. to 5 ft. high, with curiously plaited leaves 1
ft. long and 6 ins. to 8 ins. broad, regularly alternating on the stem
and overlapping each other at the base. The flowers, of a
yellowish-white colour, are borne in numerous dense spikes on the top of
the stem, forming a large panicle. The leaves being handsome, it is
worth a place in full collections of fine-foliaged hardy herbaceous
plants, and would look to best advantage in small groups in the rougher
parts of the pleasure-ground and by wood-walks. Thrives best in peaty
soil, and is best multiplied by division, as the seed is very slow and
capricious in germinating, sometimes not starting until the second year,
and it is some years before the seedlings are strong enough to flower.
The root of this plant is exceedingly poisonous. _V. nigrum_ differs
from _V. album_, in having more slender stems, narrower leaves, and
blackish-purple flowers. _V. viridiflorum_ resembles _V. album_ in every
respect, except that its flowers are of a lively green colour. France.

=*Verbascum Chaixii.=--Most of us know how very distinct and imposing
are the larger Verbascums, and those who have attempted their culture
must soon have found out what far-seeding things they are. Of a biennial
character, their culture is most unsatisfactory: they either migrate
into the adjoining shrubbery or disappear altogether. The possession of
a fine perennial species must therefore be a desideratum, and such a
plant will be found in _Verbascum Chaixii_. This is fine in leaf and
stature, and produces abundance of flowers. The lower leaves grow 18
ins. or 20 ins. long, and the plant when in flower reaches a height of 7
ft. or 8 ft., or even more when in good soil. It is a truly distinct
subject, and may, it is to be hoped, ere long be found common in our
gardens and nurseries. Like the preceding, but grown under the name _V.
vernale_, is a kind I saw in the Jardin des Plantes at Paris, and
introduced into cultivation in England; but it is as yet scarce.

=Verbesina gigantea.=--An ornamental shrub from Jamaica, about 6½ ft.
high, forming, when young, a very pleasing subject for decorative
purposes, its round green stems being covered with large, winged,
pinnate leaves of a glistening delicate-green colour, and very elegant
outline. Suitable for rich beds or groups; and should be planted out at
the end of May or early in June. _V. pinnatifida_ is a rough,
half-shrubby species with a winged stem and woolly oval leaves with
lobed or toothed margins; they are larger than those of the preceding
species, growing 3 ft. long by 14 ins. broad in the first year. Both
species require hothouse treatment in winter, and are multiplied by
cuttings in early spring. Young plants are to be preferred for effect,
and will be much the better for as warm and sheltered a position and as
rich and light a soil as can be conveniently given them.

=Wigandia macrophylla= (_caracasana_).--This noble plant, a native of
the mountainous regions of New Granada, is, from the nobility of its
port and the magnificence of its leaves, entitled to hold a place among
the finest plants of our gardens. Under the climate of London it has
made leaves which have surprised all beholders, as well by their size as
by their strong and remarkable veining and texture. It will be found to
succeed very well in the midland and southern counties of England,
though too much care cannot be taken to secure for it a warm sheltered
position, free good soil, and perfect drainage. It may be used with
superb effect either in a mass or as a single plant. It is frequently
propagated by cuttings of the roots, and grown in a moist and genial
temperature through the spring months, keeping it near the light so as
to preserve it in a dwarf and well-clothed condition; and, like all the
other plants in this class, it should be very carefully hardened off
previous to planting out at the end of May. It is, however, much better
raised from cuttings of the shoots, if these are to be had. It may also
be raised from seed. _W. macrophylla_ has the stems covered with short
stinging hairs, and bearing brownish viscid drops, which adhere to the
hand like oil when the stem is touched.

=W. Vigieri= is another fine kind of quick and vigorous growth, and
remarkable habit. In the beginning of September, 1867, I measured a
specimen with leaves 3 ft. 9 ins. long, including the leaf-stalk, and 22
ins. across; the stem, nearly 7 ft. high and 3 ins. in diameter, bearing
a column of such leaves. It is known at a glance from the popular and
older _W. macrophylla_, by the leaves and the stems being covered in a
much greater degree with glossy,

[Illustration: WIGANDIA MACROPHYLLA. (_W. caracasana_).

Tender Section; making noble leaves in the open air in summer.]



slender, stinging bodies. These are so thickly produced as to give the
stems a glistening appearance. _W. urens_ is another species often
planted, but decidedly inferior to either of the foregoing, except in
power of stinging, in which way it is not likely to be surpassed.

=Woodwardia.=--This noble genus of ferns is of great and peculiar use in
the subtropical garden, where their broad and beautifully arching fronds
make very effective objects, especially when planted in a vase, on the
top of a stump, or small mound, a little above the level of the eye. The
principal species are: _W. orientalis_, _W. radicans_, _W. japonica_,
_W. virginica_, and _W. areolata_. Of these _W. orientalis_ and _W.
areolata_ are hardy, and the others nearly so. They may be used as
effectively in the conservatory in winter as in the open garden in
summer.

=Xanthoso sagittæfolium.=--A Brazilian plant with very much the habit
and appearance of _Caladium esculentum_, but not so valuable, having
arrow-shaped leaves, of a dark-green colour, supported on rather slender
stalks. Another equally handsome and large species is _X. violaceum_,
the leaves and leaf-stalks of which are suffused with a delicate violet
hue, slightly inclining to hoariness. Positions and treatment similar to
those recommended for _Caladium esculentum_. They should only be tried
in the warmer parts of the country, and not be placed in the open air
till the beginning of June.

=Yuccas.=--Among all the hardy plants ever introduced into this country,
none surpass for our present purpose the various kinds of Yucca, or
“Adam’s Needle,” as it is commonly called. There are several species
hardy and well suited for flower-garden purposes, and, more advantageous
still, distinct from each other. The effect afforded by them, when well
developed, is equal to that of any hothouse plant that we can venture in
the open air for the summer, while they are green and ornamental at all
seasons. They may be used in any style of garden, may be grouped
together on rustic mounds, or in any other way the taste of the planter
may direct. If we had but this family alone, our efforts to produce an
agreeable effect with hardy plants could not be fruitless. The
free-flowering kinds, _filamentosa_ and _flaccida_, may be associated
with any of our nobler autumn flowering plants, from the Gladiolus to
the great _Statice latifolia_. The species that do not flower so often,
like _pendula_ and _gloriosa_, are simply magnificent as regards their
effect when grown in the full sun and planted in good soil; and I need
not say bold and handsome groups may be formed by devoting isolated beds
to Yuccas alone. They are mostly easy to increase by division of the
stem and rhizome; and should in all cases be planted well and singly,
beginning with healthy young plants, so as to secure perfectly developed
specimens.

=Yucca aloïfolia.=--A fine and distinct species, with a stem when fully
developed as thick as a man’s arm, and rising to a height of from 6 ft.
to 18 ft. Leaves numerous, rigidly ascending, dark-green, with a slight
glaucous bloom, 18 to 21 inches long and broad at the middle, with the
horny margin rolled in for 2 ins. or 3 ins. below the point, and finely
toothed in the remaining portion. Flowers almost pure white, in a vast
pyramidal panicle. This plant is hardy, but the fact is not generally
known. It should be tried on well-drained slopes in good sandy loam.
There are some varieties, of which _T. a. quadricolor_ and _T. a.
versicolor_ have the leaves variously edged with green, yellow, and red.
These fine variegated varieties are also very hardy, but as they are as
yet far from common, it will be best to utilise them in the greenhouse
or conservatory, or place them in the open air during summer. They look
very pretty isolated on the grass, the pots plunged to the rim. S.
America and W. Indies.

=*Yucca angustifolia.=--A somewhat dwarf species, the whole plant, when
in flower, not being more than 2 or 3 ft. high. The leaves are thick and
rigid in texture, from 15 ins. to 18 ins. long and about ¼ in. broad, of
a pale sea-green colour, with numerous white filaments at the edges. The
inflorescence is a simple raceme of white flowers slightly tinged with
yellow. Till more plentiful this had better be grown in warm borders, in
well-drained sandy loam. N. America.

=*Yucca canaliculata.=--The leaves of this species are entire, _i.e._
neither toothed nor filamentous at the margin, and form a dense rosette
on a stem which rises 1 or 2 ft above the ground. Each leaf is from 20
ins. to 24 ins. long, and 2 ins. to 2¼ ins. broad at the middle, very
strong and rigid, and deeply concave on the face. The flowers are of a
creamy white, in a large panicle 4 ft. to 5 ft. high. Fine for isolation
or groups. Till more plentiful should be encouraged in favourable
positions and on warm soils. Mexico.

=*Yucca filamentosa.=--A very common and well-known species, with a
much-branched panicle, 4 ft. to 6 ft. high, and apple-green leaves, from
15 ins. to 21 ins. long by 1½ ins. to 2 ins. broad at the middle,
fringed at the edges with grey filaments 2 or 3 ins. long: the outer
leaves spreading, the central ones erect or slightly recurved. This
species varies very much when raised from seed: one variety (_concava_)
has short, strong, broad leaves, with the face more concave than in the
type; another variety (_maxima_) has leaves nearly 2 ft. long by 2½ ins.
broad, with a panicle 7 ft. to 8 ft. in height. This species flowers
with much vigour and beauty, and is well worth cultivating in every
garden; not only in the flower-garden or pleasure-ground, but also on
the rough rockwork, or any spot requiring a distinct type of hardy
vegetation: and so is its fine though delicate variegated variety. All
the varieties thrive best and flower most abundantly in peaty or fine
sandy soil. N. America.

[Illustration: Yucca filamentosa.]

=*Yucca flaccida.=--A stemless species, somewhat resembling _Y.
filamentosa_, but smaller, with a downy branching panicle 3 ft. to 4
ft. high. Foliage in close rosettes of leaves, 1½ ft. to 2 ft. long, by
about 1½ in. broad at the middle, often fringed with filaments on the
edges: the young ones nearly erect, the old ones abruptly reflexed at
the middle, almost appearing as if broken. This gives such an irregular
aspect to the tufts that it at once distinguishes this kind from any of
the varieties of _Y. filamentosa_. It also flowers more regularly and
abundantly than its relative, and is exceedingly well suited for groups
of the finer hardy plants, for borders, or for being planted in large
isolated tufts. N. America.

=*Yucca glaucescens.=--A very free-flowering kind, with a panicle 3 ft.
to 4 ft. high, the branches of which are short and very downy. Leaves
sea-green, about eighteen inches long, with a few filaments on the
margins. The flowers are of a greenish-yellow colour, and when in bud
are tinged with pink, which tends to give the whole inflorescence a
peculiarly pleasing tone. A very useful and ornamental sort--fine for
groups, borders, isolation, or placing among low shrubs. N. America.

=*Yucca gloriosa.=--A species of large and imposing proportions, with a
distinct habit and somewhat rigid aspect. Flower-stem over 7 ft high,
much-branched, and bearing an immense pyramidal panicle, of large,
almost pure white flowers. Leaves numerous, stiff, and pointed. One of
the noblest plants in our gardens, and suitable for use in almost any
position. It varies very much when grown from seed--a good
recommendation, as the greater variety of fine form we have the better.
The chief varieties in cultivation are _Y. g. longifolia_, _plicata_,
_maculata_, _glaucescens_, and _minor_. The soil for this plant should
be a rich deep loam. N. America.

=*Yucca pendula.=--The best species perhaps, considering its graceful
and noble habit, which is simply invaluable in every garden. It grows
about 6½ ft. high, the leaves being at first erect and of a sea-green
colour, afterwards becoming reflexed and changing to a deep green. Old
and well-established plants of it standing alone on the grass are
pictures of grace and symmetry, from the lower leaves which sweep the
ground to the central ones that point up as straight as a needle. It is
amusing to think of people putting tender plants in the open air, and
running with sheets to protect them from the cold and rain of early
summer and autumn, while perhaps not a good specimen of this fine thing
is to be seen in the place. There is no plant more suited for planting
between and associating with flower-beds. N. America.

=*Yucca rupicola.=--A species somewhat resembling _Y. aloïfolia_, with a
stem from 4 ft. to 7 ft. high, and pale-green leaves 18 ins. to 20 ins.
long, by 1 in. broad at the middle, almost erect and frequently twisted,
the horny margin being broader and the teeth more distinct than in _Y.
aloïfolia_. This is not much in cultivation as yet, and will probably be
difficult to obtain for some time to come. N. America.

=*Yucca Treculeana.=--This species is one of the most remarkable of the
noble genus to which it belongs, from its habit, and especially from the
dimensions to which its foliage attains. Like many plants of its
family,

[Illustration: YUCCA PENDULA.

Hardy evergreen fine-foliaged Type.]

young specimens differ considerably from those which have reached
maturity. Thus, while the former have their leaves bent, generally
inflected, the full-grown plants exhibit them erect, rigid, very long,
and very straight. The stem of this plant is stout, about 10 ins. in
diameter, furnished on all sides with leaves about 4 ft. long, straight,
thick, deeply channeled, acuminate for a considerable length, and ending
in a stiff, very sharp point, very finely toothed on the edges, which
are of a brownish red and scarious. The flower-stalk is very stout,
about 4 ft. long, much branched; the branches erect, from 1 ft. to 1 ft.
8 ins. long, bearing throughout their entire length flowers with long
and narrow petals of a yellowish white, shining, and, as it were,
glazed. It is a hardy and very vigorous plant. It is not rare to see on
the Continent specimens of more than 6½ ft. in diameter. Fine for banks
and knolls, placed singly, or for the boldest groups. It comes from
Texas.

=Zea Mays.=--Were our climate a little warmer, we should find this noble
grass one of the most ornamental, as well as useful, of our plants. But
in countries where it is grown for food they would no more think of
honouring it with a place in the garden than we should of planting the
artichoke in our flower-beds, though far worse things are done every
day. In this country, however, where maize is not to be seen as a field
crop, a tuft of its tropical-looking blades has a good effect among the
“subtropical plants.” Of course it should only be tried in warm
districts, and it should always have sunny and sheltered positions and
rich soil. In light warm soils, deep, and with a free bottom, it
generally thrives very well, if a foot or so of rich and rotten manure
is placed beneath its roots. In some seasons it would here and there
ripen seeds, and in all cases one could gather a few heads of “green
corn.” In warmer countries it is always best to sow maize in the open
ground as soon as the frost permits; but in England it is better to
raise it on a gentle hotbed in April, although occasionally it will
succeed if sown out of doors. Gradually harden off the plants before
they have made more than three or four little leaves, keeping them in a
cool frame very near the glass, so as to keep them sturdy, and finally
exposing them in the same position by taking the lights quite off. This
course is perhaps the more desirable in the case of the variegated
maize. In neither case should the plants be drawn up long in heat, as,
if so, they will not thrive so well. The first few leaves the variegated
kind makes are green, but they soon begin to manifest that striping
which makes it as attractive as any variegated stove-plant we grow.
_Cuzko_ and _Caragua_ are the largest and finest of the green varieties,
and _gracillima_ the smallest and most graceful of all the varieties of
maize. They should be planted out about the middle of May.

The variegated or Japanese maize is a very remarkable and handsome
variety, found by Mr. Hogg in Japan--that great country for variegated
plants. Its beautiful variegation is reproduced true from seed, and it
is almost an indispensable plant in the flower-garden, not growing so
vigorously as the green kinds. It is particularly useful for
intermingling with arrangements of ordinary bedding-plants, for vases,
the outer margins of beds of subtropical plants, and like positions,
where its variegation may be well seen, and where its graceful leaves
will prove effective among subjects of dumpy habit. It should in all
cases have light, rich, warm soil. It has a habit of breaking into
shoots rather freely near the base of the central stem; and where it
grows very freely, this should recommend it for planting in an isolated
manner, or in groups of three or five, on the turf.

[Illustration: Yucca filamentosa variegata.]




PART III.

SELECTIONS OF PLANTS FOR VARIOUS PURPOSES IN THE SUBTROPICAL GARDEN.




SUBTROPICAL GARDENING.




SELECTIONS OF PLANTS FOR VARIOUS PURPOSES.


     _A Selection of the very finest and most distinct Subtropical
     Plants, both hardy and tender, suited for use in the climate of
     Britain._

  Acacia lophantha
  Acanthus latifolius
  Agave americana
    “       “     variegata
  Ailantus glandulosa
  Aralia canescens
    “    japonica
    “    papyrifera
    “    spinosa
  Arundo conspicua
    “    Donax
    “      “   versicolor
  Bambusa falcata
     “    japonica
     “    Simonii
     “    viridi-glaucescens
     “    edulis
  Berberis Bealii
  Beta cicla, var. chilensis
  Caladium esculentum
  Canna (in var.)
  Chamærops excelsa
  Crambe cordifolia
  Corypha australis
  Cycas revoluta
  Dimorphanthus mandschuricus
  Dicksonia antarctica
  Dracæna indivisa
  Echeveria metallica
  Erythrina (in var.)
  Ferdinanda eminens
  Ferula (in var.)
  Ficus elastica
  Gynerium argenteum
  Gunnera scabra
  Gymnocladus canadensis
  Helianthus orgyalis
  Heracleum (in var.)
  Melianthus major
  Monstera deliciosa
  Molopospermum cicutarium
  Musa Ensete
  Onopordon Acanthium
  Paulownia imperialis
  Phormium tenax
  Poa fertilis
  Polygonum cuspidatum
  Polymnia grandis
  Rheum (in var.)
  Rhus glabra laciniata
  Ricinus (in var.)
  Seaforthia elegans
  Solanum crinitipes
     “    crinitum
     “    macranthum
     “    marginatum
     “    robustum
     “    Warscewiczii
  Tupidanthus calyptratus
  Uhdea bipinnatifida
  Verbesina gigantea
  Wigandia macrophylla
     “     Vigieri
  Yucca aloïfolia
    “   canaliculata
    “   gloriosa
    “   pendula


_A Selection of hardy perennials affording the finest effects in the
Subtropical Garden._

  Acanthus, in variety
  Aralia edulis
    “    nudicaulis
  Astilbe rivularis
  Arundo Donax
    “      “   versicolor
  Bambusa, in var.
  Bocconia cordata
  Carex paniculata
    “   pendula
  Carduus eriophorus
  Carlina acaulis
  Cassia marilandica
  Centaurea babylonica
  Crambe cordifolia
  Datisca cannabina
  Echinops ruthenicus
  Eryngium alpinum
     “     amethystinum
  Gynerium argenteum
  Gunnera scabra
  Helianthus orgyalis
  Hemerocallis fulva
  Heracleum (in var.)
  Inula Helenium
  Melianthus major
  Meum athamanticum
  Molopospermum cicutarium
  Morina longifolia
  Panicum bulbosum
  “ virgatum
  Phytolacca decandra
  Polygonum cuspidatum
  Rhaponticum cynaroides
       “      pulchrum
  Rheum (in var.)
  Statice latifolia
  Tritoma (in var.)
  Yucca (in var.)
  Cynara Scolymus


_A Selection of the finest tender Subtropical Plants that will succeed
in our climate in summer._

  Acacia lophantha
  Agave americana
  Aralia papyrifera
  Asplenium Nidus-avis
  Bambusa nigra
  Bocconia frutescens
  Brexia madagascariensis
  Caladium esculentum
  Canna (in var.)
  Chamærops humilis
      “     Palmetto
  Cycas revoluta
  Dahlia imperialis
  Dracæna australis
     “    cannæfolia
     “    Draco
  Echeveria metallica
  Ferdinanda eminens
  Ficus elastica
    “   Chauvieri
  Monstera deliciosa
  Musa Ensete
  Nicotiana virginica
      “     wigandioides
  Phormium tenax (hardy in the S. of England and Ireland)
  Polymnia grandis
  Ricinus (in var.)
  Seaforthia elegans
  Selinum decipiens
  Solanum crinitipes
     “    crinitum
     “    macranthum
     “    marginatum
     “    robustum
  Solanum Warscewiczii
  Tupidanthus calyptratus
  Uhdea bipinnatifida
  Verbesina gigantea
  Wigandia macrophylla
     “     Vigieri
  Zea Mays
   “   “   variegata


_A Selection of hardy Plants suited for isolation on the turf of the
Flower-garden and Pleasure-ground._

  Acanthus latifolius
     “     longifolius
     “     mollis
     “     spinosissimus
     “     spinosus
  Aralia canescens
    “    japonica
    “    spinosa
  Astilbe rivularis
  Arundo conspicua
    “    Donax
    “      “   versicolor
  Bambusa (in var.)
  Bocconia cordata
  Canna (hardier kinds)
  Crambe cordifolia
  Datisca cannabina
  Dracæna indivisa (in the southern counties of England and Ireland)
  Echinops ruthenicus
  Elymus arenarius
    “    condensatus
  Eryngium alpinum
  Eryngium amethystinum
  Ferula (any kinds)
  Gynerium argenteum
  Gunnera scabra
  Helianthus orgyalis
  Hemerocallis flava
       “       fulva and others
  Heracleum eminens
  Melianthus major
  Molopospermum cicutarium
  Morina longifolia
  Osmunda regalis
  Phormium tenax
  Phytolacca decandra
  Poa fertilis
  Polygonum cuspidatum
  Rheum Emodi (and other species and varieties)
  Statice latifolia
  Stipa pennata
  Tritoma (any kind)
  Yucca (any kind)




_A Selection of Plants useful for the open air in summer and for
embellishing the conservatory in winter._

  Agave americana and vars. and other greenhouse species
  Brexia madagascariensis
  Chamærops excelsa
      “     Fortunei
      “     humilis
      “     Palmetto
  Cordyline indivisa
  Cycas revoluta
  Dracæna australis
     “    cannæfolia
     “    Draco
     “    indivisa, and most of the other greenhouse kinds
  Echeveria metallica
  Ficus Chauvieri
    “   elastica
  Jubæa spectabilis
  Monstera deliciosa
  Musa Ensete
  Phormium tenax, and vars.
  Phœnix dactylifera and other greenhouse species
  Seaforthia elegans
  Tupidanthus calyptratus
  Yucca aloïfolia variegata, and vars.
  Araucaria Bidwillii
      “     Cookii
      “     excelsa
      “     Rulei
  Areca sapida
  Caryota urens
     “    sobolifera
  Corypha australis
  Latania borbonica
  Woodwardias
  Half-hardy Palms, in var.


     _A Selection of hardy Plants of vigorous habit and distinct
     character suited for planting in semi-wild places in
     pleasure-grounds or near wood-walks._

  Acanthus, in var.
  Aralia canescens
    “    edulis
    “    nudicaulis
  Aralia spinosa
  Arum Dracunculus
  Asclepias Cornuti
  Asparagus Broussoneti
  Astilbe rivularis
    “     rubra
  Arundo Donax
    “      “   versicolor
    “    Phragmites
  Bambusa falcata
  Bocconia cordata
  Buphthalmum speciosum
  Carex pendula
    “   paniculata
  Carduus eriophorus
  Centaurea babylonica
  Crambe cordifolia
    “    juncea
  Cucumis perennis
  Datisca cannabina
  Dipsacus sylvestris
  Echinops ruthenicus
  Elymus arenarius
  Erianthus Ravennæ
  Eryngium alpinum
     “     amethystinum
  Ferulas, in var.
  Gunnera scabra
  Helianthus orgyalis
      “      Maximiliani
      “      lætiflorus
      “      occidentalis
      “      rigidus
      “      multiflorus
      “         “        fl. pl.
  Inula Helenium
  Hemerocallis fulva
  Heracleum, in var.
  Lavatera arborea
      “    thuringiaca
      “    unguiculata
  Hibiscus moscheutos
      “    palustris
      “    roseus
  Althæa, in var.
  Ligularia macrophylla
  Molopospermum cicutarium
  Morina longifolia
  Mulgedium alpinum
      “     Plumieri
  Onopordon Acanthium
  Pæonia, in var.
  Panicum bulbosum
  Papaver bracteatum
      “   orientale
  Petasites vulgaris
  Phytolacca decandra
  Poa aquatica
  Polygonatum multiflorum
  Polygonum cuspidatum
  Rhaponticum cynaroides
      “       pulchrum
      “       scariosum
  Rheum, in variety.
  Rumex Hydrolapathum
  Silphium, in var.
  Silybum eburneum
  “ marianum
  Spiræa Aruncus
  Statice latifolia
  Tanacetum vulgare crispum
  Thalictrum, in var.
  Tritoma, in var.
  Veratrum album
  Verbascum, in var.
  Yucca, in var.
  Cynara Scolymus
  Vernonia noveboracensis
  Verbesina persicifolia
  Rudbeckia digitata
  “ laciniata
  “ californica


_A Selection of kinds that will best withstand wind._

  Acacia Julibrissin
  “ lophantha
  Acanthus (all the kinds)
  Agave americana
  Ailantus glandulosa
  Aralia canescens
  “ japonica
  “ spinosa
  Artemisia annua
  “ gracilis
  Arundo conspicua
  “ Donax
  Astilbe rivularis
  Bambusa falcata
  Canna (in variety)
  Carlina acaulis
  Crambe cordifolia
  Cycas revoluta
  Datisca cannabina
  Dracæna indivisa
  Echinops ruthenicus
  Elymus arenarius
  Eryngium (in variety)
  Ferula (in variety)
  Ficus elastica
  Gynerium argenteum
  Kochia scoparia
  Meum athamanticum
  Molopospermum cicutarium
  Osmunda regalis
  Panicum bulbosum
  “ virgatum
  Phormium tenax
  Phytolacca decandra
  Poa fertilis
  Polygonum cuspidatum
  Rheum Emodi
  Ricinus (in var.)
  Tritoma (in var.)
  Yucca (in var.)




_Subtropical Plants to raise from seed._

  Abutilon (in var.)
  Acacia lophantha
  “ Julibrissin
  Acanthus, in var.
  Amarantus, in var.
  Aralia nudicaulis
  “ papyrifera
  “ japonica
  “ spinosa
  Artemisia annua
  “ gracilis
  Bocconia cordata
  “ frutescens
  Calla æthiopica
  Canna, in var.
  Cannabis sativa
  Baptisia australis
  “ exaltata
  Beta cicla chilensis
  Brassica oleracea crispa
  Carduus eriophorus
  Cassia marilandica
  Centaurea, in var.
  Cineraria acanthifolia
  “ maritima
  “ platanifolia
  Chamæpeuce Cassabonæ
  “ diacantha
  Crambe cordifolia
  Cyperus longus
  Dahlia imperialis
  Datura ceratocaula
  Datisca cannabina
  Dracæna, in var.
  Echeveria metallica
  Echinops ruthenicus
  Dipsacus sylvestris
  Erianthus Ravennæ
  Erythrina, in var.
  Eryngium alpinum
  “ amethystinum
  Ferdinanda eminens
  Ferula, in var.
  Astilbe rivularis
  “ rubra
  Galega officinalis
  Gynerium argenteum
  Gunnera scabra
  Geranium anemonæfolium
  Hedychium Gardnerianum
  Helianthus orgyalis
  Heracleum, in var.
  Humea elegans
  Inula Helenium
  Kochia scoparia
  Gourds
  Latania borbonica
  Lavatera arborea
  Lobelia Tupa
  Malva crispa
  Melanoselinum decipiens
  Melianthus major
  “ minor
  Meum athamanticum
  Mulgedium alpinum
  “ Plumieri
  Musa Ensete
  Nicotiana, in var.
  Onopordon Acanthium
  Panicum bulbosum
  “ capillare
  “ virgatum
  Papaver bracteatum
  Phormium tenax
  Phytolacca decandra
  Polymnia grandis
  Rhaponticum cynaroides
  “ pulchrum
  Rheum, in var.
  Ricinus, in var.
  Salvia argentea
  Seaforthia elegans
  Silphium, in var.
  Silybum eburneum
  “ marianum
  Solanum, in var.
  Statice latifolia
  Stipa pennata
  Thalia dealbata
  Thalictrum minus
  Uhdea bipinnatifida
  “ pyramidata
  Verbascum Chaixii
  Verbesina gigantea
  Wigandia macrophylla
  “ urens
  “ Vigieri
  Zea, in var.
  Arundo conspicua


_A Selection of annual and biennial Plants useful for the Subtropical
garden._

     [In this list annual plants grown for the beauty of the flower only
     are usually omitted.]

  Adlumia cirrhosa
  Amarantus, in var.
  Argemone grandiflora
  Artemisia annua
  Artemisia gracilis
  Atriplex hortensis ruber
  Cannabis gigantea
  “ sativa, and vars.
  Chamæpeuce diacantha
  “ Cassabonæ
  Chenopodium Atriplicis
  Cosmos, in var.
  Gourds, in var.
  Euphorbia variegata
  Glaucium, in var.
  Helianthus argyrophyllus
  Kochia scoparia
  Martynia lutea
  Nicotiana Tabacum
  “ virginica
  Ricinus, in var.
  Solanum erythrocarpum
  Solanum Fontanesianum
  “ racemigerum
  Tagetes tenuifolia
  Silybum eburneum
  “ marianum
  Chilian beet
  Brassica oleracea crispa
  Dipsacus sylvestris
  Heracleum, in var.
  Malva crispa
  Onopordon Acanthium
  “ tauricum
  Zea, in var.


_A selection of Flowers of various classes for association with
Subtropical Plants._

     [In this selection the dwarfer bedding-plants, etc., are omitted.
     Those selected are chiefly such as would bear more intimate
     association with fine-foliaged plants.]

  Alstræmeria, in var.
  Amaryllis Belladonna, and vars.
  Gladioli, in great variety
  Sparaxis pulcherrima
  Lilium, in great variety
  Agapanthus umbellatus, in the milder districts
  Arum crinitum
  Arum Dracunculus
  Asclepias Cornuti
  “ Douglasii
  “ tuberosa
  Calla æthiopica
  Crinum capense
  “ “ roseum
  Erythrina, in var.
  Funkia grandiflora
  Pancratium illyricum
  “ maritimum
  Tropæolum speciosum
  Acanthus longifolius
  Achillea Eupatorium
  “ Millefolium roseum
  Aconitum, in var.
  Ammobium alatum
  Anchusa italica
  Anemone japonica, and vars.
  “ vitifolia
  Antirrhinum, fine vars.
  Asphodelus luteus
  “ ramosus
  Aster turbinellus
  “ pyrenæus
  “ discolor
  “ ericoides
  “ Novæ Angliæ
  “ Novi Belgii
  “ coccineus
  “ Amellus
  “ lævis, and any other tall and ornamental kinds
  Campanula pyramidalis
  “ persicifolia, and vars.
  “ latifolia
  “ macrantha
  Coreopsis lanceolata
  Crambe cordifolia
  Delphinium, in great var.
  Dictamnus Fraxinella
  Digitalis purpurea, in var.
  Echinops ruthenicus, and any other showy species
  Epilobium angustifolium
  “ “ album
  Stenactis speciosa
  Erodium Manescavi
  Eryngium alpinum
  “ amethystinum, and other species
  Eupatorium ageratoides
  “ purpureum
  Gaillardia, in var.
  Galega officinalis
  Hedysarum coronarium
  Helenium atropurpureum
  Helianthus multiflorus fl. pl.
  Hemerocallis flava
  “ fulva
  “ disticha fl. pl., and others
  Hesperis matronalis, fl. pl.
  Iris pallida
  “ De Bergii
  “ ochroleuca
  “ germanica, in var. and any other large kind.
    Flowering early, they should be associated chiefly
    with hardy subjects
  Lathyrus latifolius, and vars.
  “ grandiflorus
  “ tuberosus
  Liatris, in var.
  Lobella Tupa, on well-drained, deep, and light soils.
     Tall herbaceous kinds in great variety
  Lupinus polyphyllus, and vars. Largest annual kinds
  Lychnis coronaria, in var.
  Lythrum roseum superbum
  “ virgatum
  Michauxia campanuloides
  Mirabilis Jalapa, in var.
  Monarda, in var.
  Morina longiflora
  Œnothera, all the tall kinds
  Pæonia, in great var.
  Poppy, in var.
  Pentstemon, in var.
  Phlomis Herba-venti
  “ tuberosa
  “ Russelliana
  Phlox, taller kinds, in great variety
  Phygelius capensis, in warm districts
  Polygonatum multiflorum, with Ferulas and other hardy things
  Polygonum orientale
  Potentilla, larger kinds in var.
  Pyrethrum, choice double and single kinds in great var.
  “ uliginosum
  Rudbeckia Newmanni
  “ hirta
  Salvia patens
  Saxifraga crassifolia
  Schizostylis coccinea
  Scabiosa caucasica
  Scilla peruviana
  Sedum spectabile
  “ “ purpureum
  Spiræa palmata
  “ venusta
  Statice latifolia
  Stokesia cyanea, on warm soils in the south
  Symphytum bohemicum
  “ caucasicum
  Thermopsis fabacea
  Tradescantia virginica, and its varieties
  Tigridia Pavonia, and other kinds
  Tritoma, all the kinds
  Trollius napellifolius
  “ asiaticus, and others
  Veronica, any tall herbaceous kinds, and in southern
    and mild districts the varieties
    of the evergreen New Zealand species
  Vinca major, on the fringes of beds or groups of hardy kinds
  Hollyhock, in var.
  Dahlia, show, fancy, pompone, and bedding vars.
  Verbascum Thapsus
  “ Chaixii
  Baptisia australis
  Vernonia noveboracensis
  Fuchsia, in var.
  Datura ceratocaula
  Abutilon, in var.
  Ageratum, in var.
  Petunia, in var.
  Chrysanthemum, early-flowering kinds
  Amarantus, in var.
  Argemone grandiflora
  Calliopsis, in var.
  Cosmos bipinnatus purpureus
  Echinacea angustifolia
  “ atropurpurea
  Hibiscus, any of the perennial American kinds
  Malope, in var.
  Matthiola, in var.
  Scabiosa atropurpurea, in var.
  French and African marigolds
  Xeranthemum annuum, and vars.
  Zinnia, in great variety
  China aster, in var.
  Brugmansia sanguinea


_List of Plants for forming mixtures and carpets beneath Subtropical
Plants._

  Abronia umbellata
  Acroclinium roseum
  Ageratum mexicanum, and vars.
  Alyssum maritimum
  Anagallis indica
  Athanasia, in var.
  Brachycome iberidifolia
  Calandrinia discolor
  Calliopsis Drummondi
  “ tinctoria
  China aster, in var.
  Centaurea
  Centranthus macrosiphon
  Clarkia, in var.
  Clintonia, in var.
  Collinsia, in var.
  Convolvulus tricolor
  Erysimum Peroffskianum
  Eschscholtzia, in var.
  Eucharidium concinnum
  Eutoca viscida
  Gaillardia picta
  Gilia, in var.
  Godetia, in var.
  Gypsophila, annual kinds
  Iberis coronaria
  “ umbellata
  Ionopsidium acaule
  Lantana, in var.
  Leptosiphon, in var.
  Limnanthes Douglasii, in var.
  Linum grandiflorum
  Lobelia, the dwarf and annual kinds
  Lupinus affinis
  Mimulus, in var.
  Myosotis palustris
  “ dissitiflora
  “ sylvatica
  Nemesia versicolor
  Nemophila, in var.
  Nolana, in var.
  Omphalodes linifolia
  Oxalis corniculata atropurpurea
  Oxalis rosea
  Petunia, in var.
  Portulaca, in var.
  Mignonette
  Malcolmia maritima
  Rhodanthe Manglesii, and vars.
  Saponaria calabrica
  Schizanthus, in var.
  Silene pendula
  Sphenogyne speciosa
  Tropæolum, the bedding vars.
  Verbena, in var.
  Viola cornuta
  “ lutea
  “ odorata
  Viscaria oculata
  Whitlavia grandiflora
  Tradescantia zebrina
  Saxifraga, the mossy section
  Gnaphalium lanatum
  Panicum variegatum
  Lycopodium denticulatum


_Trees and Shrubs of remarkable foliage suited for the Subtropical
garden._

     [The trees of this Selection will for the most part display much
     greater beauty and size of foliage if kept in a dwarf
     simple-stemmed condition by being cut down every year. Conifers
     are, of course, excepted.]

  Hydrangea quercifolia
  Comptonia asplenifolia
  “ Lindleyana
  Paulownia imperialis
  Acacia dealbata
  “ Julibrissin
  “ lophantha
    (These are only suited for warm parts of the southernmost counties)
  Ailantus glandulosa
  Aralia canescens
  “ japonica
  “ spinosa
  Bambusa falcata and others
  Berberis Bealii and others
  Chamærops excelsa
  Dracæna indivisa
  Gymnocladus canadensis
  Lavatera arborea
  Melianthus major
  Rhus glabra laciniata and others
  Yucca (in var.)
  Conifers (in var., small specimens of the most graceful kinds)
  Ampelopsis (climbers)
  Aristolochia Sipho (climber)
  Ficus Carica
  Fraxinus excelsior crispa
  Magnolia macrophylla
  Salisburia adiantifolia
  Hedera Regnieriana
  Carya alba
  “ olivæformis
  Catalpa syringæfolia
  Pterocarya caucasica
  Robinia hispida
  Rubus biflorus
  “ laciniatus
  Colletia (in var.)
  Gleditschia (young plants)
  Kœlreuteria paniculata
  Robinia Pseud-acacia umbraculifera
  Tamarix, in var.
  Vines (American species)
  Juglans cinerea
  “ regia
  “ “ laciniata


_A Selection of Conifers for association with flower-garden Plants._

  Abies pygmæa
  Araucaria imbricata
  Arthrotaxus cupressoides (selaginoides)
  “ laxifolia
  Biotia cupressiformis
  “ nana
  “ orientalis elegantissima
  “ orientalis variegata aurea
  Cephalotaxus drupacea
  Chamæcyparis sphæroidea variegata
  “ sphæroidea viridis
  Cryptomeria elegans
  Cupressus Lawsoniana
  “ “ nana
  “ “ variegata
  “ “ erecta viridis
  Cupressus nutkaensis
  Dacrydium glaucum
  Juniperus chinensis
  “ “ variegata
  “ excelsa stricta
  “ fragrans
  “ hibernica
  “ tamariscifolia
  “ “ variegata
  “ virginiana viridis pendula
  Retinospora ericoides
  “ leptoclada
  “ lycopodiodes
  “ obtusa
  “ “ aurea
  “ “ compacta
  “ pisifera
  “ “ alba variegata
  “ “ aurea
  Taxus baccata elegantissima
  “ “ variegata
  Thuja aurea
  Thuja gigantea
  “ nana
  Thujopsis dolabrata
  “ lætevirens


     _Conifers most suited for the surroundings of the flower-garden and
     pleasure-ground--kinds which, though noble and graceful as can be
     in many instances, are yet too large for anything but the framing
     of the picture, so to speak._

  Abies Douglasii
  “ Engelmanni
  “ Menziesii inverta
  “ Hookeriana
  “ orientalis
  Cephalotaxus Fortunei
  Juniperus virginiana glauca
  “ “ thurifera
  Libocedrus tetragona
  Picea amabilis (magnifica)
  “ nobilis
  “ Nordmanniana
  Picea Parsonsi
  “ Pinsapo
  Pinus Cembra
  “ monticola
  “ insignis (where it thrives)
  Sciadopitys verticillata
  Thuja gigantea (true)
  “ plicata
  “ pyramidalis
  Thujopsis Standishii
  Sequoia gigantea
  “ sempervirens


_A Selection of Gourds._

Amongst the most beautiful are the Turk’s Cap varieties, such as Grand
Mogul, Pasha of Egypt, Viceroy, Empress, Bishop’s Hat, etc; the Serpent
Gourd, Gooseberry Gourd, Hercules’ Club, Gorilla, St. Aignan, Mons.
Fould, Siphon, Half-moon, Giant’s Punchbowl, and the Mammoth, weighing
from 170lb. to upwards of 200lb.; while amongst the miniature varieties
the Fig, Cricket-ball, Thumb, Cherry, Striped Custard, Hen’s-egg, Pear,
Bottle, Orange, Plover’s-egg, etc., are very pretty examples, and very
serviceable for filling vases, etc. All these are well adapted to the
climate of England, and there are many others equally suitable--a fact
sufficiently indicated in one collection shown by Mr. W. Young, which
consisted of 500 varieties, all English grown, the greater number of
which were sown where grown, and came to maturity without the assistance
of glass or any other protection. The ground being manured and dug one
spit deep, the seed was sown the second week in May, and from first to
last many of the plants had no water supplied to them through the
season. Others, by way of experiment, had it in various quantities--the
more water was given, the larger, the freer, and the better the produce.
Sowing in a frame at the end of April, and exposing them to the free air
during the day so as to prevent them being drawn, and then removing the
frame altogether to harden them off before planting out, would be the
best way to secure an early growth of gourds. Sowing in the open ground
under hand-lights would also do, but not so well.


_Ornamental Grasses._

  Agrostis nebulosa
  Arundo conspicua
  “ Donax
  “ “ versicolor
  “ festucoides
  “ Phragmites
  Bambusa, in var.
  Elymus arenarius
  “ condensatus
  Erianthus Ravennæ
  Gynerium argenteum, and its vars.
  Calamagrostis argentea
  Poa aquatica
  “ fertilis
  Saccharum ægyptiacum
  “ cylindricum
  “ Maddenii
  Stipa pennata
  Zea Mays
  Andropogon argenteus
  “ bombycinus
  “ formosus
  “ Sorghum
  “ strictus
  “ squarrosus
  Chloropsis Blanchardiana
  Gymnothrix latifolia
  Holcus saccharatus
  Erianthus strictus
  “ violascens
  Chloris myriostachys
  Panicum bulbosum
  “ altissimum
  “ capillare
  “ miliaceum
  “ virgatum
  “ maximum
  “ palmifolium
  “ gongyloides
  Panicum violaceum
  Penicillaria spicata
  Sorghum cernuum
  “ halepense
  “ melanocarpum
  “ nankinense
  “ tataricum
  Tripsacum monostachyum
  “ dactyloides
  Milium nigricans
  “ multiflorum
  “ effusum
  Bromus brizopyroides
  Briza gracilis
  “ geniculata
  “ maxima
  “ rufiberbis
  Hordeum jubatum
  Pennisetum longistylum
  Piptatherum multiflorum
  Agrostis spica-venti
  Setaria germanica
  Stipa capillata
  Chascolytrum erectum
  Leptochloa gracilis
  Agrostis Steveni
  Echinochloa Zenkowski
  Paspalum elegans




_List of Ferns that may be grown with advantage away from the fernery
proper._

     [Even should any of these thrive better in shade, it is usually
     easy to secure this for them in groups by wood-walks.]

  Adiantum pedatum
  Asplenium Filix-fœmina and vars.
  Dennstœdtia punctilobula
  Diplazium thelypteroides
  Lastrea Filix-mas and vars.
  “ Goldieana
  “ “ assurgens intermedia
  “ marginalis
  “ noveboracensis
  “ atrata
  “ erythrosora
  “ opaca
  “ Standishii
  Lomaria magellanica, in warm shady places
  Onoclea sensibilis
  Osmunda cinnamomea
  “ Claytoniana
  “ gracilis
  “ regalis
  Osmunda regalis cristata
  “ spectabilis
  Polypodium hexagonopterum
  Polypodium Phegopteris
  Polystichum acrostichoides
  “ aculeatum
  “ angulare
  “ vestitum venustum
  Pteris aquilina
  Scolopendrium vulgare and vars.
  Struthiopteris germanica
  “ pennsylvanica
  Woodwardia areolata
  “ aspera
  “ japonica
  “ orientalis
  “ radicans
  Cyrtomium caryotideum
  “ falcatum




_List of hardy aquatics and bog-plants of bold and distinct habit
suitable for grouping on the margins of lakes, etc._

  Nuphar lutea
  “ advena
  “ pumila
  Nymphæa alba
  “ odorata
  Menyanthes trifoliata
  Equisetum Telmateia
  Rumex Hydrolapathum
  Typha angustifolia
  “ latifolia
  Carex pendula
  “ paniculata
  “ Pseudocyperus
  Scirpus lacustris
  Butomus umbellatus
  Poa aquatica
  Arundo Phragmites
  Cyperus longus
  Cladium Mariscus
  Pontederia cordata
  Acorus Calamus
  Iris Pseudacorus
  Alisma Plantago
  Orontium aquaticum
  Lysimachia thyrsiflora
  Lythrum Salicaria
  Epilobium hirsutum
  Calla æthiopica
  “ palustris
  Hippuris vulgaris

                         THE END.

LONDON: PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, STAMFORD STREET
                    AND CHARING CROSS.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Subtropical Garden, by W. Robinson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SUBTROPICAL GARDEN ***

***** This file should be named 50243-0.txt or 50243-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/0/2/4/50243/

Produced by Shaun Pinder, Chuck Greif and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
