The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Substance of Faith Allied with Science
(6th Ed.), by Oliver Lodge

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Substance of Faith Allied with Science (6th Ed.)
       A Catechism for Parents and Teachers

Author: Oliver Lodge

Release Date: October 27, 2015 [EBook #50330]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SUBSTANCE OF FAITH ***




Produced by Charlene Taylor, Elizabeth Oscanyan, Bryan
Ness and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/Canadian
Libraries)









                         THE SUBSTANCE OF FAITH




       Transcriber's note for the text version:
       _text_ means that the text was printed in italic font.
       =text= means that the text was printed in bold font.
       y^n means that base, y, is to be raised to the power, n.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                 =THE=

                          =SUBSTANCE OF FAITH=

                          ALLIED WITH SCIENCE

                  A CATECHISM FOR PARENTS AND TEACHERS


                                   BY

                        SIR OLIVER LODGE, F.R.S.

               PRINCIPAL OF THE UNIVERSITY OF BIRMINGHAM




                             SIXTH EDITION




                             METHUEN & CO.
                          36 ESSEX STREET W.C.
                                 LONDON


------------------------------------------------------------------------




           First Published                      February 1907
           Second Edition                       February 1907
           Third, Fourth, and Fifth Editions    March    1907
           Sixth Edition                        April    1907




------------------------------------------------------------------------




               Gloriam quæsivit scientiarum, invenit Dei.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                PREFACE


Everyone who has to do with children at the present day, directly or
indirectly, must in some form or another have felt the difficulty of
instructing them in the details of religious faith, without leaving them
open to the assaults of doubt hereafter,

when they encounter the results of scientific inquiry.

Sometimes the old truths and the new truths seem to conflict; and though
everyone must be aware that such internecine warfare between truths can
be an appearance only, the reconciliation is not easily perceived: nor
is the task simplified by the hostile attitude adopted towards each
other by some of the upholders of orthodox Christianity.

It is sometimes said to be impossible for a teacher to educate a class
subject to compulsory attendance, in a spirit of weal-th, peace, and
godliness, without infringing the legitimate demands of somebody; but
the difficulty is caused chiefly by sectarian animosity, which may take
a variety of forms.

These religious and educational disputes would be of small consequence,
and might even be stimulating to thought and fervour, were it not that
one danger is imminent:—a danger lest the nation, in despair of a
happier settlement, should consent to a system of _compulsory_
secularism; and forbid, in the public part of the curriculum of
elementary schools, not only any form of worship, but any mention of a
Supreme Being, and any quotation from the literature left us by the
Saints, Apostles, Prophets, of all ages.

If so excentric a negation is brought about by the warfare of
denominations, they will surely all regard it as a lamentable result.

Meanwhile, in the hope and belief that the great bulk of the teachers of
this country are eager and anxious to do their duty, and lead the
children committed to their care along the ways of righteousness,—being
deterred therefrom in some cases only by the difficulty of following out
their ideals amid the turmoil of voices, and in other cases by their
uncertainty of how far the “old paths” can still be pursued in the light
of modern knowledge,—I have attempted the task of formulating the
fundamentals, or substance,[1] of religious faith in terms of Divine
Immanence,[2] in such a way as to assimilate sufficiently all the
results of existing knowledge, and still to be in harmony with the
teachings of the poets and inspired writers of all ages. The statement
is intended to deny nothing which can reasonably be held by any specific
Denomination, and it seeks to affirm nothing but what is consistent with
universal Christian experience.

Our knowledge of the Christian religion is admittedly derived from
information verbally communicated, and from documents; and, in the
interpretation of these sources, mistakes have been made. At one time,
not long ago, it was the duty of serious students of all kinds to point
out some of these mistakes, wherever they ran counter to sense and
knowledge. That cleaning and sweetening work has been done vigorously,
and done well: at the present time comparatively little sweeping remains
to be done, save in holes and corners: most of the lost simplicity has
now been found. A positive or constructive statement of religious
doctrine, not indeed deduced from present knowledge, but in harmony with
all that bears upon the subject, is now more useful. Such a statement
might be called New Light on Old Paths; for the “old paths” remain, and
are more brightly illuminated than ever: even the old Genesis story of
man’s early experience shines out as a brilliant inspiration. Truth
always grows in light and beauty the more it is uncovered.

There are still people who endeavour to deny or disbelieve the
discoveries of science. They are setting themselves athwart the stream,
and trying to stop its advance;—they only succeed in stopping their own.
They are good people, but unwise, and, moreover, untrustful. If they
will let go their anchorage, and sail on in a spirit of fearless faith,
they will find an abundant reward, by attaining a deeper insight into
the Divine Nature, and a wider and brighter outlook over the destiny of
man.

-----

Footnote 1:

  “By Substance I understand that which exists in and by itself.”
  (Spinoza.)

Footnote 2:

  “We may say much, yet not attain; and the sum of our words is, He is
  all.” (Ecclesiasticus xliii. 27.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                           TABLE OF CONTENTS


    CHAP.                                                       PAGE
          PREFACE—ON RELIGIOUS TEACHING                          vii
          INTRODUCTION—A PLEA FOR SYMPATHY AND BREADTH             1
       I. THE ASCENT OF MAN                                        6
      II. THE DEVELOPMENT OF CONSCIENCE                           20
     III. CHARACTER AND WILL                                      24
      IV. DUTY AND SERVICE                                        32
       V. GOODNESS AND BEAUTY AND GOD                             36
      VI. MAN A PART OF THE UNIVERSE                              42
     VII. THE NATURE OF EVIL                                      46
    VIII. THE MEANING OF SIN                                      52
      IX. THE DEVELOPMENT OF LIFE                                 56
       X. COSMIC INTELLIGENCE                                     60
      XI. IMMANENCE                                               64
     XII. HIGHER FACULTIES, OR SOUL AND SPIRIT                    76
    XIII. THE REALITY OF GRACE AND OF INCARNATION                 84
     XIV. THE TRUTH OF INSPIRATION                                92
      XV. A CREED                                                 96
     XVI. THE LIFE ETERNAL                                       104
    XVII. THE COMMUNION OF SAINTS                                112
   XVIII. PRAYER                                                 116
     XIX. THE LORD’S PRAYER                                      120
      XX. THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN                                  122
          APPENDIX.  THE CLAUSES REPEATED                        128




                        REFERENCES TO QUOTATIONS


  PAGE
    ix “Old paths”                  Jer. vi. 16.
    13 “Hear no yelp”               Tennyson, “By an Evolutionist.”
    22 “Then welcome”               Browning, “Rabbi Ben Ezra.”
    22 “We fall to rise”            Browning, “Asolando.”
    23 “Nor shall I deem”           Browning, “Paracelsus.”
    30 “If my body”                 Tennyson, “By an Evolutionist.”
    33 “Our wills”                  Tennyson, “In Memoriam.”
    37 “The old order”              Tennyson, “Morte d’Arthur.”
    39 “Lilies that fester”         Shakespeare, Sonnet 94.
    43 “All tended”                 Browning, “Paracelsus.”
    44 “He hath shewed thee”        Micah vi. 8.
    48 “The best is yet to be”      Browning, “Rabbi Ben Ezra.”
    49 “My son, the world”          Tennyson, “Ancient Sage.”
    50 “There shall never be”       Browning, “Abt Vogler.”
    51 “No ill no good”             Tennyson, “Ancient Sage.”
    55 “All we have willed”         Browning, “Abt Vogler.”
    59 “Where dwells enjoyment”     Browning, “Paracelsus.”
    59 “God tastes an infinite”     Browning, “Paracelsus.”
    65 “πάντα ῥεὶ ϰαὶ οὐδὲν μένει.” Heraclitus.
              (Everything flows and nothing is stagnant.)
    65 “The hills are shadows”      Tennyson, “In Memoriam.”
    73 “πάντα πλήρη θεῶν.”          Thales, quoted by Aristotle.
                     (All things are full of gods.)
    73 “Earth’s crammed”            E. B. Browning, “Aurora Leigh.”
    78 “Our birth”                  Wordsworth, “Immortality.”
    81 “We are such stuff”          Shakespeare, “Tempest.”
    83 “Climb the mount”            Tennyson, “Ancient Sage.”
    86 “That none but Gods”         Tennyson, “By an Evolutionist.”
    87 “Flash of the will”          Browning, “Abt Vogler.”
    87 “All through my keys”        Browning, “Abt Vogler.”
    89 “’Tis the sublime”           Coleridge, “Religious Musings.”
    90 “Enough that he heard it”    Browning, “Abt Vogler.”
   101 “A sun but dimly seen”       Tennyson, “Akbar’s Dream.”
   106 “But that one ripple”        Tennyson, “Ancient Sage.”
   110 “Signs of his coming”        Morris, “Love is Enough.”
   115 “Then stirs the feeling”     Byron,  “Childe Harold.”
   115 “ἡ φυχὴ τῷ ὅλῳ μέμιϰται”     Aristotle, “De Animâ.”
                     (Spirit permeates the whole.)
   115 “Whose dwelling”             Wordsworth, “Tintern Abbey.”
   124 “Their prejudice”            Browning,  “Paracelsus.”
   126 “And we the poor earth’s”    Tennyson, “Ancient Sage.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              INTRODUCTION

There is a growing conception of religion which regards it not as a
thing for special hours or special days, but as a reality permeating the
whole of life. The old attempt to partition off a region where Divine
action is appropriate, from another region in which such action would be
out of place—the old superstition that God does one thing and not
another, that He speaks more directly through the thunder of catastrophe
or the mystery of miracle than through the quiet voice of ordinary
existence—all this is beginning to show signs of expiring in the light
of a coming day.

Those to whom such a change is welcome regard it as of the utmost
importance that this incipient recognition of a Deity immanent in
History and in all the processes of Nature shall be guided and elevated
and made secure. Ancient formularies must be reconsidered and remodelled
if they are to continue to express eternal verities in language
corresponding to the enlarged acquaintance with natural knowledge now
possessed by humanity.

Nevertheless the attempt to draw up anything of the nature of a creed or
catechism, unhallowed by centuries of emotion and aspiration, is
singularly difficult; and to obtain general acceptance for such a
production may be impossible.

Every Denomination is likely to prefer its own creed or formula,
especially if it has the aroma of antiquity upon it—an aroma of high
value for religious purposes and more easily destroyed than replaced. No
carefully drawn statement can be expected to go far enough to satisfy
religious enthusiasts: it is not possible to satisfy both scientific and
distinctively denominational requirements. All this might be admitted,
and yet it may be possible to lay a sound foundation such as can stand
scientific scrutiny and reasonable rationalistic attack—a foundation
which may serve as a basis for more specific edification among those who
are capable of sustaining a loftier structure.

Even though not yet fully attainable, it is permissible to hope for more
union than exists at present among professing Christians, and among the
branches of the Christian Church. With some excellent people the
differences and distinguishing marks loom out as of special importance;
but from these I can hardly claim attention. I must speak to those who
try to seize points of agreement, and who long for the time when all
Christian workers may be united in effort and friendliness and
co-operation, though not in all details of doctrine. On the practical
side, a concurrence of effort for the amelioration and spiritualisation
of human life, in the light of a common gospel and a common hope, is not
impossible; and on the theoretical side, in spite of legitimate
differences of belief on difficult and infinite problems, there must be
a mass of fundamental material on which a great majority are really
agreed.

But a foundation is not to be mistaken for superstructure: a
full-fledged and developed religion needs a great deal more than
foundation—there must be a building too. The warmth and vitality
imparted by strong religious conviction is a matter of common
observation, and is a force of great magnitude; but it is a personal and
living thing, it cannot be embodied in a formula or taught in a class.
Here lies the proper field of work of the Churches. What can be taught
in a school is the fundamental substratum underlying all such
developments and personal aspirations; and it can be dealt with on a
basis of historical and scientific fact, interpreted and enlarged by the
perceptions and experiences of mankind.

A creed or catechism should not be regarded as something superhuman,
infallible, and immutable; it should be considered to be what it really
is—a careful statement of what, in the best light of the time, can be
regarded as true and important about matters partially beyond the range
of scientific knowledge: it must always reach farther into the unknown
than science has yet explored.

An element of mystery and difficulty is not inappropriate in a creed,
although it may be primarily intended for comprehension by children.
Bare bald simplicity of statement, concerning things keenly felt but
imperfectly known, cannot be perfectly accurate; and yet every effort
should be made to combine accuracy and simplicity to the utmost. Every
word should be carefully weighed and accurately used: mere conventional
terminology should be eschewed. A sentence stored in the memory may
evolve different significations at different periods of life, and at no
one period need it be completely intelligible or commonplace. The ideal
creed should be profound rather than explicit, and yet should convey
some sort of meaning even to the simplest and most ignorant. Its terms,
therefore, should not be technical, though for full comprehension they
would have to be understood in a technical or even a recondite sense.

To make a statement of this kind useful, it is necessary to accompany
each clause with some indication of the supplementary teaching necessary
to make it assimilable: and such hints should be adapted not only to
professed teachers, but to parents and all who have to do directly or
indirectly with the education of children. It is my hope that the
following clauses and explanations may be of some use also to the many
who experience some difficulty in recognising the old landmarks amid the
rising flood of criticism, and who at one time or another have felt
shaken in their religious faith. Some of them are sure to have attained
emancipation and conviction for themselves, but in so far as their own
insight has led them in the general direction indicated by what follows,
these will not be the last to welcome an explicit statement, even though
in several places they may wish to modify and amend it. They will
recognise that there is an advantage, for some purposes, in throwing old
and over-familiar formulæ into new modes of expression; and that a
variety in mode of formulation does not necessarily indicate a lack of
appreciation of the loftiest truths yet vouchsafed to humanity.

With these preliminary remarks I now submit a catechism, whereof the
clauses are intended to be consistent with the teachings of Science in
its widest sense, as well as with those of Literature and Philosophy,
and to lead up to the substance or substratum of a religious creed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                   I

                           THE ASCENT OF MAN


    _Q.  What are you?_

    _A._  I am a being alive and conscious upon this earth; a
    descendant of ancestors who rose by gradual processes from
    lower forms of animal life, and with struggle and suffering
    became man.




                  *       *       *       *       *


                                CLAUSE I

This answer does not pretend to exhaust the nature of man; another
aspect is dealt with in Clause XII. It is usual to impart the latter
mode of statement first; but premature dwelling on the more mystical
aspect of human nature, with ignorance or neglect of the biological
facts actually ascertained concerning it, only gives rise to troubled
thought in the future when the material facts become known—often in
crude or garbled form—and leads to scepticism.

The clause as it stands is a large and comprehensive statement, that
will need much time for its elucidation and adequate comprehension. Its
separate terms may be considered thus:—

EARTH.—Children can gradually be assisted to realise the earth as an
enormous globe of matter, with vast continents and oceans on its surface
and with a clinging atmosphere, the whole moving very rapidly (nineteen
miles each second) through space, and constituting one of a number of
other planets all revolving round the sun. They may also be led to
realise that from the distance of a million miles it would appear as an
object in the sky rather like the moon; that from a greater distance it
would look like any of the other planets; while from a vastly greater
distance neither it nor any other planet is large or luminous enough to
be visible—nothing but the sun would then be seen, looking like a star.
It is occasionally helpful to realise that the earth, with all its
imperfections, is one of the heavenly bodies.

BEING.—The mystery of existence may be lightly touched upon. The fact
that anything whatever—even a stone—exists, raises unanswerable
questions of whence and why. It is instructive to think of some rocks as
agglomerations of sand, and of sand as water-worn fragments of previous
rock; so that, even here, there arises a sense of infinitude.

ALIVE.—The nature of life and, consequently, of death is unknown, but
life is associated with rapid chemical changes in complex molecules, and
is characterised by the powers or faculties of assimilation, growth, and
reproduction. It is a property we share with all animals and also with
plants. Children should not be told this in bald fashion, but by
judicious questioning should be led to perceive the essence of it for
themselves. Soon after they realise what is meant by life, some of them
will perceive that it has an enormous range of application, and will
think of flowers as possessing it also: being subject like all living
things to disease and death.

What plants do not possess is the specifically animal power of purposed
locomotion, of hunting for food and comfort, with its associated
protective penalty of pain.

CONSCIOUS.—Here we come to something specially distinctive of higher
animal life. Probably it makes its incipient appearance low down in the
scale, in vague feelings of pain or discomfort, and of pleasure; though
it is not likely that worms are as conscious as they appear to us to be.
In its higher grades consciousness means awareness of the world and of
ourselves, a discrimination between the self and the external
world—“self-consciousness” in its proper signification: an immense
subject that can only be hinted at to children. They can, however, be
taught to have some appreciation of the senses, or channels, whereby our
experience of external nature is gained; and to perceive that the way in
which we apprehend the universe is closely conditioned by the particular
sense-organs which in the struggle for existence have been evolved by
all the higher kinds of animal life,—organs which we men are now
beginning to put to the unfamiliar and novel use of scientific
investigation and cosmic interpretation. What wonder if we make
mistakes, and are narrow and limited in our outlook!

                       _Digression on the Senses_

Our fundamental interpretative sense is that of touch—the muscular sense
generally. Through it we become aware of space, of time, and of matter.
The experience of _space_ arises from free motion, especially
locomotion; _speed_ is a direct sensation; and _time_ is the other
factor of speed. Time is measured by any uniformly moving body—that is
by space and speed together. Muscular action impeded, the sense of
_force_ or resistance, is another primary sensation; and by inference
from this arises our notion of “matter,” which is sometimes spoken of as
a permanent possibility of sensation. Hardness and softness, roughness
and smoothness, are all inferences from varieties of touch. Another
sense allied to touch is that of _temperature_, whereby we obtain
primitive ideas concerning heat. Then there are the chemical senses of
taste and smell; and lastly, the two senses which enable us to draw
inferences respecting things at a distance. These two attract special
attention; for the information which they convey, though less
fundamental than that given by the muscular sense, is of the highest
interest and enjoyment.

The ear is an instrument for the appreciation of aerial vibrations, or
ripples in the air. They may give us a sense of harmony; and in any case
they enable us to infer something concerning the vibrating source which
generated them, so that we can utilise them, by a prearranged code, for
purposes of intelligent communication with each other—a process of the
utmost importance, to which we have grown so accustomed that its wonder
is masked.

The eye is an instrument for appreciating ripples in the ether. These
are generated by violently revolving electric charges associated with
each atom of matter, and are delayed, stopped, and reflected in various
ways, by other matter which they encounter in their swift passage
through the ethereal medium.

From long practice and inherited instinct we are able, from the small
fraction of these ripples which enter our eyes, to make inferences
regarding the obstructive objects from which they have been shimmered
and scattered. It is like inferring the ships and boats and obstacles in
a harbour from the pattern of the reflected ripples which cross each
other on the surface of the water.

The precision and clearness with which we can thus gain knowledge
concerning things beyond our reach, and the extraordinary amount of
information that can be thus conveyed, are nothing short of miraculous:
though, again, we are liable to treat sight as an everyday and
commonplace faculty. We are not, however, directly conscious of the
ripples, though they are the whole exciting cause of the sensation; our
real consciousness and perception are of the objects which have invested
the ripples with their peculiarities, have imprinted upon them certain
characteristics, and made them what they are. The eye is able to analyse
all this, as the ear analyses the tones of an orchestra.

                  *       *       *       *       *

ANCESTORS.—In the first instance _human_ ancestors may be considered,
and a family tree drawn for any one child; from which he will learn how
large a number of persons combine to form his ancestry. The tree can
also represent the converging effect of inter-marriages, so that
ultimate descent from a common ancestor is not an impossibility, if the
facts of biology and ethnology point in that direction—as it appears
they do. The probable though remote relationship existing between all
the branches of the human family may be suggested by an inverted tree
descending from some remotest ancestor: for whom Noah is as good a name
as any other.

ROSE.—The doctrine of the ascent of man may be found in some cases to
conflict with early religious teaching. If so, offence and iconoclasm
should be carefully avoided; and if the teacher feels that he can
conscientiously draw a distinction, between the persistent vital or
spiritual essence of man, and the temporary material vehicle which
displays his individual existence amid terrestrial surroundings, he may
with advantage do so. The second or higher aspect of the origin of man
is dealt with in Clause XII. The history and origin of the spiritual
part of man is unknown, and can only be rightly spoken of in terms of
mysticism and poetry: the history of the bodily and much of the mental
part is studied in the biological facts of evolution.

The doctrine of the ascent of man, properly regarded, is a doctrine of
much hope and comfort. Truly it is an unusual item in a child’s creed;
but it is, I think, a helpful item: it explains much that would
otherwise be dark, and it instils hope for the future. For in the light
of an evolution doctrine we can readily admit—(1) that low and savage
tendencies are naturally to be expected at certain stages, for an
evanescent moment; and (2) that having progressed thus far, we may
anticipate further—perhaps unlimited—advance for mankind.

The fact that each individual organism hastily runs through, or
reduplicates, a main part of the series of stages in the life-history of
its race, is a fact of special interest and significance; notably in
connection with the trials and temptations of human beings during their
effort to cleanse away the traces of animal nature. The severity of the
contest is already lessening, and both the individual and the race may
look forward to a time when the struggles and failures are nearly over,
when the unruliness of passion is curbed, when at length we

   “. . . hear no yelp of the beast, and the man is quiet at last
   As he stands on the heights of his life with a glimpse of a height
     that is higher.”

GRADUAL PROCESSES.—The slowness and precariousness of evolution may be
indicated; and the possibility of descent or degeneration, as well as of
ascent and development, must be insisted on. A genealogical tree can be
drawn laterally, to illustrate the origin of any set of animals—both
those risen and those fallen in the scale—from some, possibly
hypothetical, common ancestor. The dog on the one hand, and the wolf or
jackal on the other, may serve as easy examples of ascent and descent
respectively, and of relationship between higher and lower species, or
even genera, without direct or obvious connection. The horse and the
bear may serve as examples of distant relationship; birds and reptiles
as another; and we may point out that at each stage of inheritance some
of the progeny may ascend a little in the scale, and some descend a
little.

Presently the sponge of time may wipe out the common ancestry at the
root of the lateral tree, and nothing be left but some of its ascending
and some of its descending branches,—all suited to their environment and
so continuing to live and flourish, each in its own way; but so
apparently different, that relationship between them is a matter of
inference, and is sometimes difficult to believe in. The example of the
caterpillar and butterfly, however, of the tadpole and the frog, etc.,
can be used to remove incredulity at extraordinary and instructive
transmutations—transmutations which in the individual represent rapidly
some analogous movements of racial development in the history of the
distant past. The degradation of certain free-swimming animals, such as
ascidians, which in old age become rooted or sessile like plants, can be
pointed to as typical, and, indeed, a true representation of what has
gone on in a race also, during long periods of time. The rapid passage
of the embryo through its ancestral chain of development should be
known, at any rate to the teacher; and in general the greater the
teacher’s acquaintance with natural history, the more living and
interesting will be the series of lessons that can occasionally be given
on this part of the clause.

The popular misconception concerning the biological origin of man, that
he is descended from monkeys like those of the present day, is a trivial
garbling of the truth. The elevated and the degraded branches of a
family can both trace their descent from a parent stock; and though the
distant common ancestor may now be lost in obscurity, there is certainly
in this sense a blood relationship between the quadrumana and the
bimana: a relationship which is recognised and is practically useful in
the investigations of experimental pathology.

LOWER FORMS OF ANIMAL LIFE.—The existence of single cells and other low
microscopic forms (like amœbæ), and the analysis or dissection of a more
complex structure (say rhubarb) into the cells of which it is in a sense
composed, together with some indication of the vital processes occurring
in similar but isolated cells (such as yeast or protococcus) which lead
us to consider them as possessing life—of a form so fundamental that
there is in some cases no clear discrimination between animal and
vegetable—may be spoken of and exhibited in the microscope.

From a not very different-looking minute germinal vesicle, or nucleus of
a cell, the chick is developed.

The lower forms of animal life, spoken of in the clause as ancestral,
may be understood to go back to forms even as low as these,—indeed, to
the lowest and minutest forms which in dim and distant ages can have
possessed any of the incipient characteristics of life at all: down,
perhaps, to some unknown process whereby the earthy particles began to
coalesce under a vivifying influence. And as the race springs from lowly
forms of cell life, so does the individual,—the body of each individual
was once no more than a microscopic cell-nucleus or germinal vesicle.
Therein was the germ of life: and the complex aggregate of cells we now
possess has all been put together by the directive power latent in, or
initially manifested by, that germ. So it is also with a seed—an apple
pip, an acorn, or a grain of mustard seed.

But there are many forms of animal life not in the direct line of our
ancestry—side branches, as it were, of the great terrestrial family. At
present the earth is dominated by man, but at one time it was mastered
by gigantic reptiles, larger than any land creature of to-day, the
remains of which are occasionally found fossilised into stone and
embedded in the rocks; fit to be collected and preserved in museums.

For millions of years the earth was inhabited by creatures no higher
than these; the progress upwards has been slow and patient: time is
infinitely long, and the great history of the world is still working
itself out.

Still do lower forms exist side by side with higher; and many of them
are suited to their surroundings, and in their place are beautiful and
sane and perfect of their kind. But a few of the lower forms are lower
because they have failed to reach the standard of their race, they are
very far from any kind of perfection, they are at war with their
environment; and for these, the only alternatives are extinction or
improvement. In such a species as man the variety or range of
achievement and of elevation is enormous. Among men and their works we
find, on the one hand, cathedrals and oratorios and poems, and faith and
charity and hope; on the other, slums and ugliness and prisons, and
spite and cruelty and greed. And we must not forget that want of harmony
with environment may in some cases be the fault, not of the individual,
but of the environment: a fault which it is specially likely to possess
when man-made. For every now and then is born an individual far above
the average of the race, amid surroundings which he finds deadly and
depressing. He may be despised and rejected by his fellows, and
nevertheless may be the precursor or herald of a nobler future.

The problem, the main human problem, is how to deal with the earth
now—now that we have at length attained to conscious control—so as to
cease perpetuating the lower forms, and to encourage the production of
the higher; by giving to all children born on the planet a fair chance
of becoming, each in its own way, a noble specimen of developed
humanity.

STRUGGLE AND SUFFERING.—Children should realise the bleak and
unprotected state through which their remote ancestors must have begun a
human existence, the great dangers which they had to overcome, the
contests with beasts and with the severities of climate, the hardships
and perils and straits through which they passed; and should be grateful
to those unknown pioneers of the human race, to whose struggles and
suffering and discoveries and energies our present favoured mode of
existence on the planet is due.

The more people realise the effort that has preceded them and made them
possible, the more are they likely to endeavour to be worthy of it: the
more pitiful also will they feel when they see individuals failing in
the struggle upward and falling back towards a brute condition; and the
more hopeful they will ultimately become for the brilliant future of a
race which from such lowly and unpromising beginnings has produced the
material vehicle necessary for those great men who flourished in the
recent epoch which we speak of as antiquity; and has been so guided,
since then, as to develop the magnificence of a Newton and a Shakespeare
even on this island in the northern seas.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                   II

                     THE DEVELOPMENT OF CONSCIENCE


    _Q. 2.  What, then, may be meant by the Fall of man?_

    _A._ At a certain stage of development man became conscious
    of a difference between right and wrong, so that thereafter,
    when his actions fell below a normal standard of conduct, he
    felt ashamed and sinful. He thus lost his animal innocency,
    and entered on a long period of human effort and failure;
    nevertheless, the consciousness of degradation marked a rise
    in the scale of existence.




                  *       *       *       *       *


                               CLAUSE II

This clause has been inserted because of the historic, though often
mistaken, notions accreted round a legend of Fall and of a Paradise
lost; and it is of interest to detect the germ of truth which these
ancient ideas contain. It may be regarded as really an appendage of, or
introductory to, the next clause.

The sense of guilt and shame is to some extent displayed by a dog; but
it appears to be due to domestication, and to be a secondary result of
human influence. In any case, it is certainly only the higher animals
that thus exhibit the germ of conscience, and the sense of shame and
remorse: a sense which is most real and genuine when it is independent
of externally inflicted and of expected punishment. Wild animals appear
to have no such feeling, they glory in what we may picturesquely speak
of as their “misdeeds,” and in running the gauntlet of danger to achieve
them; and though often cruel, they are free from sin. Some savages—our
own Norse forefathers among others—must on their freebooting expeditions
have been in similar case. So were some of the Homeric heroes. It would
be only the highest and most thoughtful among them that could rise to
the sense of guilt and degradation. Only those who have risen are liable
to fall. The summit of manhood is attained when evil is consciously
overcome. The period before it was recognised as such has been called
the golden age; but the condition of unconsciousness of evil, though
joyous, is manifestly inferior to the state ultimately attainable, when
paradise is regained through struggle and victory.

Mere innocency, the freedom from sin by reason only of lack of
perception, is not the highest state; it has been thought ideal from the
point of view of inspiration and poetry, but it is a condition in which
advance is necessarily limited. Sooner or later fuller knowledge and
consciousness must arrive; and then ensues a long period of discipline
and distress, until first a Leader and ultimately the race find their
way out, through temptation and difficulty, once more to freedom and
joy.

A perception that the possibility of backsliding is a necessary
ingredient in the making of man, and the consequent discernment of a
soul of goodness in things evil, constitute a large part of the teaching
of Browning:

                “Then welcome each rebuff
                That turns earth’s smoothness rough,
      Each sting that bids nor sit nor stand, but go!
                Be our joys three parts pain!
                Strive to hold cheap the strain;
      Learn, nor account the pang: dare, never grudge the throe.”

And again—

             “We fall to rise, are baffled to fight better,
                     Sleep to wake——”

The intervening period between fall and victory, between loss of
innocency and gain of righteousness, is the period with which all human
history is concerned: and there is often a corresponding period in the
life-history of every fully developed individual, during which he gropes
his way through darkness and longs for light.

Immense is the area still to be traversed and illumined: only faint
gleams penetrate the dusk. A Light has indeed shone through the
darkness, but the darkness comprehended it not. The race itself is still
enveloped in mist, and only here and there a glint of reflexion heralds
the brightness of a coming dawn. Yet a time will come when we shall cast
away the works of darkness and put upon us the armour of light, and
stand forth in the glory of completed manhood:

            “Nor shall I deem his object served, his end
            Attained, his genuine strength put fairly forth,
            While only here and there a star dispels
            The darkness, here and there a towering mind
            O’erlooks its prostrate fellows. When the host
            Is out at once, to the despair of night,
            When all mankind alike is perfected,
            Equal in full-blown powers—then, not till then,
            I say, begins man’s general infancy.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                  III

                           CHARACTER AND WILL


    _Q. 3.  What is the distinctive characteristic of man?_

    _A._ The distinctive character of man is that he has a sense
    of responsibility for his acts, having acquired the power of
    choosing between good and evil, with freedom to obey one
    motive rather than another.

    Creatures far below the human level are irresponsible; they
    feel no shame and suffer no remorse; they are said to have
    no conscience.




                  *       *       *       *       *


                               CLAUSE III

                          CHARACTER OF MANHOOD

In putting this question, children may be asked to suggest
characteristics which distinguish man from animals. If gradually they
hit upon clothes and fire and speech they will do well.

_Clothes_ may be defined as artificial covering removable at will;
“artificial” meaning made by an artificer, or manufactured, as opposed
to natural growth, like fur. But the changes of covering among animals
should not be overlooked: moulting for instance, renewal of skin
necessitated by growth, protective change of colour at summer and
winter, and so on.

The discovery of _Fire_ is a thing to be emphasised, because familiarity
with lucifer matches is liable to engender contempt for this great
pre-historic discovery. People should realise that at one time the
production of flame _de novo_ was extremely difficult: the ordinary
method of lighting fires being to keep some one fire always alight, so
that brands could be ignited at it and thus it could be spread. The fact
that lighting other fires does not diminish or weaken the original
stock, is noteworthy, and is an analogy with life which may be typified
by oaks and acorns—any number of trees arising from a parent stock, and
spreading for innumerable generations. The ancient ceremony of keeping
flames alight on sacred altars was doubtless due to the difficulty of
re-ignition when every fire in a village had accidentally become
extinguished. That the ancients valued fire highly, and felt strongly
the difficulty of generating it, is shown by the legend that the first
fire must have been stolen from heaven; and the priests taught, as usual
in barbarous times, that the gods were jealous and angry at man’s
discoveries and the progress of science.

_Speech_ and _language_ is a most vital characteristic of manhood, and
is largely responsible for the chasm between him and other animals. The
gestures and noises of animals must not be overlooked, however, and they
often seem to have mysterious modes of communication of some kind. But
they have nothing akin to _writing_, and this portentous discovery
enables not merely communication between contemporary living men, but an
accumulation of information and experience throughout the centuries; so
that a man is no longer dependent solely on his own individual
experience, but is able to draw upon the records and wisdom of the past.
Owing to this power of recording and handing on information, a discovery
once made becomes the possession of the human race henceforth for
ever—unless it relapses into barbarism.

                                  WILL

None of these characteristics, however, is emphasised in the clause,
because they lead too far afield if pursued. For our present purpose we
regard the sense of “conscience,” suggested by the previous answer, as
the most important and highest characteristic of all,—the sense of
responsibility, the power of self-determination, the building up of
character, so that ultimately it becomes impossible to be actuated by
unworthy motives. Our actions are now controlled not by external
impulses only, but largely by our own characters and wills. The man who
is the creature of impulse, or the slave of his passions, cannot be said
to be his own master, or to be really free; he drifts hither and thither
according to the caprice or the temptation of the moment, he is
untrustworthy and without solidity or dignity of character. The free man
is he who can control himself, who does not obey every idea as it occurs
to him, but weighs and determines for himself, and is not at the mercy
of external influences. This is the real meaning of choice and free
will. It does not mean that actions are capricious and undetermined; but
that they are determined by nothing less than the totality of things.
They are not determined by the external world alone, so that they can be
calculated and predicted from outside: they are determined by self and
external world together. A free man is the master of his motives, and
selects that motive which he wills to obey.

If he chooses wrongly, he suffers; he is liable also to make others
suffer, and he feels remorse. In a high grade of existence no other
punishment is necessary. Artificial punishment has for its object the
production of artificial remorse, in creatures too low as yet for the
genuine feeling. Artificial punishment can be easily exaggerated and
misapplied, and should be employed with extreme caution. It is always
ambitious and often dangerous, though sometimes justifiable and
necessary, to attempt to take the place of Providence. Even between
parents and children, enforcement of another’s will may be overdone,
till the power of self-control and the instinct of duty are impaired.

The sense of responsibility inevitably grows with power and knowledge,
and is proportional thereto. By means of drugs a grown man may enfeeble
his will till he becomes in some sense irresponsible for his actions;
but he is not irresponsible for his wilful destruction of a human
faculty; and in so far as he is dangerous to others he must be treated
accordingly.

The struggle in man’s nature between the better and the worse
elements,—sometimes spoken of as a struggle between dual personalities,
and otherwise depicted as a conflict between the flesh and the
spirit,—is a natural consequence of our double ancestry (spoken of in
Clause XII.), our ascent from animal fellow-creatures, and our
relationship with a higher order of being. No man in his sober senses
really wills to do evil: he does it with some motive which he tries to
think justifies it; or else he does it against his real will because
mastered by something lower. So Plato teaches in the _Gorgias_. And St.
Paul says the same thing:

“The good which I would, I do not; but the evil which I would not, that
I do.”

The conflict is often a period of torment and misery. “O, wretched man
that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this death?”

Whenever the better nature prevails in the struggle, there is a mystic
sense of strength and comfort universally testified to by humanity, even
though the victory results in temporal loss or persecution; “in all
these things we are more than conquerors.” And this fact corresponds
with part of the answer to Question 6 below.

We can recognise that our evil impulses are the natural remnant of
bestial ancestry, and need not be due to diabolical promptings. An
animal, though perhaps innocent from lack of knowledge, is bound and
enslaved by its instincts; for instance, the apparently intelligent and
social bee is driven by racial instincts into a prescribed course of
action; a cat can no more refrain from trying to catch a bird than a man
of high nature can allow himself to commit a crime.

The weak man often allows his brute nature to get the upper hand and
enslave his higher self, and he hates himself afterwards for the
degradation so caused; but the strong and free man takes control, and
dominates his animal nature.

    “If my body come from brutes, tho’ somewhat finer than their own,
    I am heir, and this my kingdom. Shall the royal voice be mute?
  No, but if the rebel subject seek to drag me from the throne,
    Hold the Sceptre, Human Soul, and rule thy Province of the brute.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                   IV

                            DUTY AND SERVICE

    _Q. 4.  What is the duty of man?_

    _A._ To assist his fellows, to develop his own higher self,
    to strive towards good in every way open to his powers, and
    generally to seek to know the laws of Nature and to obey the
    will of God; in whose service alone can be found that
    harmonious exercise of the faculties which is identical with
    perfect freedom.




                  *       *       *       *       *


                               CLAUSE IV

The laws of nature signify the ascertained processes and consistencies
observable in all surrounding things; they are a special and partial,
but accurately ascertainable, aspect of what is called the will of God.
They cannot be broken or really disobeyed; but we may set ourselves in
fruitless antagonism to them,—as by building a bridge too weak to stand,
by various kinds of wrong conduct, eating unduly or wrong kind of food,
by careless sanitation and neglect of health. But all such ignorance or
neglect of the laws of nature involves disaster. By knowing them, and
acting with them, we show wisdom; and by steady persistence in right
action we attain the highest development possible to us at present; we
also escape that dreary sense of disloyal hopeless struggle against
circumstances which is inconsistent with harmony or freedom. So long as
the will of any creature is antagonistic to the rest of the universe, it
is not fully developed. There must be a harmony among all the parts of a
whole; but in the case of free beings it is not a forced but a willing
harmony that is aimed at; and all experience takes time

                “Our wills are ours, we know not how,
                Our wills are ours to make them Thine.”

The higher a man can raise himself in the scale of existence—by
education, right conduct, and persistent effort—the more he may be able
to help his fellows. To some are given ten talents, to some five, and to
another one; but it is the duty of all to use their talents to the
uttermost, so that they may fulfil the intention of the higher Power
which brought us into existence and intrusted us with responsible
control. Events do not happen without adequate cause, and in so far as
agents, stewards, or trustees rest on their oars or misuse their
opportunities, improvements now possible will not be accomplished. We
must regard ourselves as instruments and channels of the Divine action;
even in a few things we must be good and faithful servants, and it is
our privilege to help now in the conscious evolution and development of
a higher life on this planet.

The race of man has far to travel before it can be regarded as an
efficient organ of the Divine Purpose. The extremes of ability and
character and virtue are widely separated; and the occasional elevation
of a leader, here and there, serves but to display the darkness in which
the majority of a race so newly evolved are still imprisoned; crawling
feebly toward the light, in a state of only rudimentary consciousness;
anxious about trivialities, opposing and hindering instead of helping
each other, competing rather than co-operating, fighting and struggling
and killing in the throes of racial birth. It is often difficult to
realise the possible perfectness of human life, in the midst of so much
difficulty and discouragement.

And much of the difficulty is unnecessary and artificial. Deficiency in
the means of subsistence, or in modest comfort, is not a reasonable
condition of human life. The earth is ready to yield plenty for all, and
will when properly treated and understood; but never will it spoil its
children with bounties from a neglected breast. It must be coaxed and
coerced, and then it will respond lavishly. We expend plenty of energy
already, only we misapply it. If only our aim could be changed, and our
energy be concentrated on clear and conscious pressing forward, with a
definite mark in view—towards which all could work together and all
together could attain, instead of one at the expense of others—“then
would the earth put forth her increase, and God, even our own God, would
give us His blessing.”


(The “duty” clauses in the Church Catechism are well worth learning.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                   V

                      GOODNESS AND BEAUTY AND GOD


    _Q. 5.  What is meant by good and evil?_

    _A._ Good is that which promotes development, and is in
    harmony with the will of God. It is akin to health and
    beauty and happiness.

    Evil is that which retards or frustrates development, and
    injures some part of the universe. It is akin to disease and
    ugliness and misery.




                  *       *       *       *       *


                                CLAUSE V

“Development” means unfolding of latent possibilities; as a bud unfolds
into a flower, or as a chicken develops from an egg.

The idea controlling this answer is that growth and development are in
accordance with the law of the universe, and that destruction and decay
are features which are only good in so far as they may be on the way to
something better; as leaf-mould assists the growth of flowers, or as
discords in their proper place conduce to, or prepare for, harmony. In
the same way conditions and practices which once were good become in
process of time corrupt; yet out of them must grow the better future.

            “The old order changeth, yielding place to new,
            And God fulfils Himself in many ways,
            Lest one good custom should corrupt the world.”

The law of the Universe, and the will of God, are here regarded as in
some sort synonymous terms. It is impossible properly to define such a
term as “God,” but it is permissible reverently to use the term for a
mode of regarding the Soul of the Universe as invested with what in
human beings we call personality, consciousness, and other forms of
intelligence, emotion, and will. These attributes, undoubtedly possessed
by a part, are not to be denied to the whole; however little we may be
able as yet to form a clear conception of their larger meaning.

It is quite clear that the Universe was not made by man; it must owe its
existence to some higher Power of which man has but an infinitesimal
knowledge. Some primary conception of such a Power has been
independently formed by every fraction of the human race, and is what
under various symbols has been called God.

It is sometimes asserted that God does not possess powers and faculties
and attributes which we ourselves possess. But that is preposterous: for
though we may be able to form no conception as to the particular form
our powers would take, when possessed by a being even moderately higher
in the scale of existence than ourselves; and although vastly more must
be attributed to the Reality denoted by the term “God” than we can even
begin to conceive of; yet such a term, if it is to have any meaning at
all, must at least include everything we have so far been able to
discover as existent in the Universe. It must, in fact, be the most
comprehensive term that can be employed; though for practical purposes
it may be permissible to discriminate, and exclude from its connotation,
portions such as “self,” and “the world,” and sometimes, though with
less excuse, even an abstraction like “nature”; considering these
separately from the more purely personal aspect to which attention is
directed by our ordinary use of the term God. It is convenient to
differentiate the principle of evil also, and to reserve it for separate
study.

Sometimes the totality of existence is spoken of as the “Absolute,” and
the term God is limited to the conception of a Being of infinite
Goodness and Mercy, the ultimate Impersonation of Truth and Love and
Beauty; a Being of whose attributes the highest faculties and
perceptions of man are but a dim shadow or reflexion.

In man, goodness is the path toward higher development, and a radiant
beauty is the crown and perfection of life; so the trinity of Truth,
Goodness, and Beauty, often referred to in literature, may, without
undue stretching, be considered as also equivalent to what is
represented by the words, the Way, the Truth, and the Life; they are
three aspects of what after all is one essential unity. That which is
good, in the highest sense, cannot help being both true and beautiful.
Nevertheless, for many practical purposes, these ideas must be
discriminated; and the question is occasionally forced upon our
attention whether vitality or beauty can possibly be enlisted in the
service of evil; and if so, whether it is still in itself good.

We have to learn that most good things can be misapplied, and that
though they do not in themselves cease to be good, their desecration is
especially deadly. That the corruption of the best abets the cause of
the worst, is proverbial; the prostitution of high gifts to base ends is
the saddest of spectacles.

            “Lilies that fester smell far worse than weeds.”

Oratory, the power of persuasion, can thus be debased, and the passions
of the multitude may be incited by the Divine fire of eloquence.
Rhetoric and sophistry have been on this ground condemned when they were
misused for the cultivation of the art of persuasion apart from
knowledge and virtue; but almost every good gift—personal affection,
medical science, artistic genius—has every now and then been abused; and
the higher and nobler the faculty, the more sorrowful and diabolical
must be its prostitution.

It has been an ancient puzzle to consider whether the principle of
goodness is the supreme entity in the universe—a principle to which God
as well as man is subject—or whether it represents only the arbitrary
will of the Creator. Many answers have been given, but the answer from
the side of science is clear:—

No existing universe can tend on the whole towards contraction and
decay; because that would foster annihilation, and so any incipient
attempt would not have survived; consequently an actually existing and
flowing universe must on the whole cherish development, expansion,
growth: and so tend towards infinity rather than towards zero. The
problem is therefore only a variant of the general problem of existence.
Given existence, of a non-stagnant kind, and ultimate development must
be its law. Good and evil can be defined in terms of development and
decay respectively. This may be regarded as part of a revelation of the
nature of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                   VI

                        MAN PART OF THE UNIVERSE


    _Q. 6.  How does man know good from evil?_

    _A._ His own nature, when uncorrupted by greed, is
    sufficiently in harmony with the rest of the universe to
    enable him to be well aware in general of what is a help or
    hindrance to the guiding Spirit, of which he himself is a
    real and effective portion.




                  *       *       *       *       *


                               CLAUSE VI

We are not something separate from the Universe, but a part of it: a
part of it endowed with some power of control—power to guide ourselves
and others and assist in the scheme of development—power also to go
wrong, to set ourselves contrary to the tendency of things, to delay
progress, and break ourselves in conflict with overpowering forces.

When not thus warped or misled, we fit into the general scheme, and,
like all other portions of existence, can fulfil our function and take
our due share in the general progress. We are a part of the Universe,
and the Universe is a part of God. Even we also, therefore, have a
Divine Nature and may truly be called sons and co-workers with God. The
consciousness of this constitutes our highest privilege, and likewise
our gravest responsibility. Perception of this is dawning with
increasing brightness on the human race in the light of the doctrine of
evolution. The process of evolution has no end: progress is toward an
advancing goal. At one time

                          “... all tended to mankind,
              And, man produced, all has its end thus far:
              But in completed man begins anew
                A tendency to God.”

We are essential and active agents in the terrestrial order of things,
analogous to the white corpuscles in the human body. The body may be
regarded as a colony of cells, some of which are living and moving on
their own account; in complete ignorance of the feelings and perceptions
of the larger whole of which they are microscopic units, towards whose
health and comfort nevertheless they unconsciously but very really
contribute; it is in fact by their activity that the health of the body
is maintained against adverse influences. So it is with the health of
the body politic, to which our wise activity is necessary and essential;
we are to be a corporate portion of the whole, effective servants of the
guiding and controlling Spirit. But in our case it is not merely
unconscious service that is called for: we are privileged not only to be
servants, but friends; not only to work, but to sympathise; to give not
only dutiful but affectionate service. This is required of the humblest,
and no more is required of the noblest:

“He hath shewed thee, O man, what is good; and what doth the Lord
require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly
with thy God?”

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                  VII

                           THE NATURE OF EVIL




    _Q. 7.  How comes it that evil exists?_

    _A._ Evil is not an absolute thing, but has reference to a
    standard of attainment. The possibility of evil is the
    necessary consequence of a rise in the scale of moral
    existence; just as an organism whose normal temperature is
    far above “absolute zero” is necessarily liable to damaging
    and deadly cold. But cold is not in itself a positive or
    created thing.




                  *       *       *       *       *


                               CLAUSE VII

The term “evil” is relative: dirt, for instance, is well known to be
only matter out of place; weeds are plants flourishing where they are
not wanted; there are no weeds in botany, there are weeds in gardening;
even disease is only one organism growing at the expense of another;
ugliness is non-existent save to creatures with a sense of beauty, and
is due to unsuitable grouping. Analysed into its elements, every
particle of matter must be a miracle of law and order, and, in that
sense, of beauty.

Recent discoveries in connexion with the internal structure of an atom,
whereby the constituent particles are found to move in intricate and
ascertainable orbits—leading to a new science of atomic
astronomy—emphasise this assertion to an extent barely credible ten
years ago.

Even what can be called filth—that is to say material which, to the
casual observer, or when encountered at unsuitable times, is
disgusting—may to an investigator, or under other circumstances, be of
the highest interest; and may even arouse a sense of admiration, by
reason of manifest subservience to function.

Many social evils are due to human folly and stupidity, and will cease
when the race has risen to a standard already attained by individuals.

Excessive hunger and starvation are manifestly evils of a negative
character: they are merely a deficiency of supply: they have no business
to exist in a civilised and organised community. Famine and pestilence
can be checked by applications of science.

Pain is an awful reality, when highly developed organisms are subjected
to wounds and poison and disease. Some kinds of pain have been wickedly
inflicted by human beings on each other in the past, and other kinds may
be removed or mitigated by the progress of discovery in the future.
Physiologically the nerve processes involved are well worthy of study
and control. Premature avoidance of pain would have been dangerous to
the race, and not really helpful to the individual: but great advances
in this direction are now foreshadowed. Already surgical operations can
be conducted painlessly; and a time is foreshadowed when, through
hypnosis, excessive and useless torture can be shut off from
consciousness, by intelligence and will; somewhat as the random leakage
of an electric supply can be checked. All this will come in due time:

       “The best is yet to be,
       The last of life for which the first was made:
               Our times are in His hand
               Who saith a whole I planned,
       Youth shows but half: trust God, see all, nor be afraid.”

The contrast between good and evil can be well illustrated by the
contrast between heat and cold. Cold is only the absence of heat, and is
made at once possible and necessary by the existence of degrees of heat.
The fact that we regard excessive cold as an evil is only because our
organisation demands a certain temperature for life; there is nothing
evil about cold in itself: it is only evil in its relation to organisms
sufficiently high to be damaged by it. The real _fact_ is their normally
high temperature, and their delicacy of response to stimuli. These
things are good; and the only evil is a defect or deficiency of these
good things.

Every rise involves the possibility of fall. Every advance seems to
entail a corresponding penalty.

The power of assimilating food leaves the organism open to the pangs of
hunger, that is, of insufficient nutriment,—manifestly only the absence
of a good.

In a world devoid of life there is no death; in a world without
conscious beings there is no sin. In a world without affection there
would be no grief; and to a larger vision much of our grief may be
needless:—

           “My son, the world is dark with griefs and graves,
           So dark that men cry out against the Heavens.
           Who knows but that the darkness is in man?”

A mechanical universe might be perfectly good. Every atom of matter
perfectly obeys the forces acting upon it, and there is no error or
wickedness or fault or rebellion in lifeless nature. Evil only begins
when existence takes a higher turn. There is not even destruction or
death in the inorganic world—only transformation. The higher possibility
called life entails the correlative evils called death and disease. The
possibility of keen sensation, which permits pleasure, also involves
capacity for the corresponding penalty called pain: but the pain is in
ourselves, and is the result of our sensitiveness combined with
imperfection.

The still higher attribute of conscious striving after holiness, which
must be the prerogative of free agents capable of virtue or purposed
good, and marks so enormous a rise in the scale of creation,—involves
the possibility that beings so endowed may fall from their high level,
and, by definitely applying themselves to harm instead of good, may
abuse their high power and suffer the penalty called sin; but the evil
in all cases is a warped or distorted good, and has reference to the
higher beings which are now in existence.

  “There shall never be one lost good! what was shall live as before;
  The evil is null, is nought, is silence implying sound;
  What was good shall _be_ good, with, for evil, so much good more;
  On the earth the broken arcs; in the heaven a perfect round.”

Some further idea of the necessity for evil can be conveyed as follows:—

Contrast is an inevitable attribute of reality. Sickness is the negative
and opposite of health: without sickness we should not be aware what
health was. There is no sickness in inorganic nature; yet, even there,
contrast is the essence of existence. Everything that _is_ must be
surrounded by regions where it is not. There is no stupid infinity, or
absence of boundaries, about existing things,—however infinite their
totality may be,—no absence of limitation, either of perfection or of
anything else. Existence involves limitation. A tree that is _here_ is
excluded from being everywhere else. Goodness would have no meaning if
badness were impossible or non-existent.

              “No ill no good! such counter-terms, my son,
              Are border-races, holding, each its own
              By endless war.”

We are not machines or automata, but free and conscious and active
agents, and so must contend with evil as well as rejoice in good.
Conflict and difficulty are essential for our training and development:
even for our existence at this grade. With their aid we have become what
we are; without them we should vegetate and degenerate; whereas the will
of the Universe is that we arise and walk.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                  VIII

                           THE MEANING OF SIN


    _Q. 8.  What is sin?_

    _A._ Sin is the deliberate and wilful act of a free
    agent who sees the better and chooses the worse, and
    thereby acts injuriously to himself and others. The
    root sin is selfishness, whereby needless trouble and
    pain are inflicted on others; when fully developed it
    involves moral suicide.




                  *       *       *       *       *


                              CLAUSE VIII

The essence of sin is error against light and knowledge, and against our
own higher nature. Vice is error against natural law. Crime is error
against society. Sin against our own higher nature may be truly said to
be against God, because it is against that purpose or destiny which by
Divine arrangement is open to us, if only we will pursue and realise it.

Sin is a disease: the whole of existence is so bound together that
disease in one part means pain throughout; the innocent may suffer with
the guilty, and suffering may extend to the Highest. The healing
influences of forgiveness, felt by the broken and the contrite heart,
achieve spiritual reform though they remove no penalty. Every eddy of
conduct, for good or ill, must have its definite consequence.

We have high authority for the statement that hard circumstances and
disabilities, not of our own making, are mercifully taken into account;
while privileges and advantages weigh heavily in the scale against us,
if we prove unworthy:

         “If ye were blind ye would have no sin;
         but now ye say We see, therefore your sin remaineth.”

A man’s or woman’s nature may be so weakened and warped by miserable
surroundings, that its strength is insufficient to cope with its
environment. Pity, and a wish to help, are the feelings which such a
state of things should arouse, together with an active determination to
improve or remove the conditions which lead to such an untoward result.
Most human failures are the result of bad social arrangements, and they
constitute an indictment against human inertness and selfishness. It is
a terrible responsibility to turn a human soul out of terrestrial life
worse than when it entered that phase of existence. In so far as it
accomplishes that, humanity is performing the function of a devil.
Deterioration of others is usually achieved under the influence of some
of the protean forms of social greed and selfishness.

Another reason why selfishness is spoken of as specially deadly, and
even suicidal, depends upon certain regions of scientific inquiry not
yet incorporated into orthodox science and therefore still to be
regarded as speculative; it may be outlined as follows:—

Our present familiar methods of communicating with each other are such
as speech, writing, and other conventional codes of signs more or less
developed. It appears possible that a germ or nucleus of another,
apparently immediate or directly psychical, method of communication may
also exist; which has nothing to do with our known bodily organs,
although its impressions are apprehended or interpreted by the receiver
as if they were due to customary modes or forms of sensation. Whether
that be so or not, it is certain that bodily neighbourhood and blood
relationship confer opportunities for making friends which should be
utilised to the utmost, and that friendship and affection are the most
important things in life.

The intercourse with, and active assistance of, others enlarges our own
nature; and hereafter, when we have lost our bodily organs, it is
probable that we shall be able to communicate only with those with whom
we are connected by links of sympathy and affection.

A person who cuts himself off from all human intercourse and lives a
miserly self-centred life, will ultimately, therefore, find himself
alone in the universe; and, unless taken pity on and helped in a spirit
of self-sacrifice, may as well be out of existence altogether. (A book
called _Cecilia de Noel_ emphasises this truth under the guise of a
story.) That is why developed selfishness is spoken of as moral suicide:
it is one of those evil things which truly assault and hurt the soul. It
is a disintegrating and repelling agency. Love is the linking and
uniting force in the spiritual universe, enabling it to cohere into a
unity, in analogy with attractive forces in the material cosmos.

It has been necessary to dwell on the sin and pain and sorrow in the
world, but the amount of good must be emphatically recognised too.

Our highest aspirations, and longings for something better, are a sign
that better things exist. It is not given to the creature to exceed the
Creator in imagination or in goodness; and the best and highest we can
imagine shall be more than fulfilled by reality—in due time:—

     “All we have willed or hoped or dreamed of good, shall exist:
     Not its semblance, but itself; ...
     When eternity affirms the conception of an hour.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                   IX

                          DEVELOPMENT OF LIFE


    _Q. 9.  Are there beings lower in the scale of existence
    than man?_

    _A._ Yes, multitudes. In every part of the earth where life
    is possible, there we find it developed. Life exists in
    every variety of animal, in earth and air and sea, and in
    every species of plant.




                  *       *       *       *       *


                               CLAUSE IX

One of the facts of nature which we must weld into our conception of the
scheme of the universe, is the strenuous effort made by all live things
to persist in multifarious ways,—spreading out into quite unlikely
regions, in the struggle for existence, and establishing themselves
wherever life is possible. The fish slowly developing into a land
animal, the reptile beginning to raise itself in the air and ultimately
becoming a bird, the mammal returning under stress of circumstances to
the water, as a seal or whale, or betaking itself to the air in search
of food, in the form of a bat,—all these are instances of a universal
tendency throughout animate nature.

Sometimes this determined effort at persistence breeds forms that appear
to us ugly and deleterious. For the struggle results not only in
beneficent organisms, but also in parasites and pests and blights, and
may be held to account for the numerous cases of the interference of one
form of life with another: one form utilising another for its own
growth, and sometimes destroying that other in the process. It accounts
also for the ravages of disease, which for the most part is an outcome
of the establishment of a foreign and alien growth in a living body of
higher grade,—a growth whose vital secretions are poisonous to its
temporary host. On the other hand, the theory of manuring, the
purification of rivers, the treatment of sewage, the use of opsonins and
of serum-injections,—all illustrate the ministration of one form of life
to another; they exhibit the contribution of beneficent organisms,—that
is, of forms of life which promote higher development and conduce to
well-being.

Many of the microbes and bacteria and low forms of cell life are
beneficent in this way; and it is our function,—as ourselves one of the
forms of life,—now consciously to intervene and take control of these
vital processes. By investigation and study we can gradually understand
the condition and life-history of each organism, and then can take such
measures as will encourage the beneficent forms whether plant or animal,
and destroy or eliminate those which from the human point of view are
deadly and destructive,—attacking them at their weakest and most
vulnerable stage. Widely regarded or interpreted, this function covers
an immense range of possible activity—from every kind of scientific
agriculture and the extirpating of tropical diseases, to the reformation
of slum dwellings and the encouragement of physical training and school
hygiene. As part of our work in regulating this planet and utilising its
possibilities to the utmost for higher purposes, the regulation of vital
conditions is probably our most pressing, and also at present our most
neglected, corporate duty. Stupidity and a mistaken parsimony are among
the serious obstacles with which the progressive portions of humanity
have to contend.

Another aspect of the universal struggle for self-manifestation and
corporeal realisation, which plays so large a part in all activity and
is especially marked in the domain of life, is illustrated on a higher
level by that overpowering instinct or impulse towards production and
self-realisation, which is characteristic of genius. It may be said that
throughout nature, from the lowest to the highest, a tendency to
self-realisation, and a manifestation of joy in existence, are
conspicuous.

It is thought that something akin to this tendency is exhibited in a
region beyond and above what is ordinarily conceived of as “Nature.” The
process of evolution can be regarded as the gradual unfolding of the
Divine Thought, or _Logos_, throughout the universe, by the action of
Spirit upon matter. Achievement seems as if irradiated by a certain
Happiness: and thus a poet like Browning is led to speak of the Divine
Being as renewing his ancient creative rapture in the processes of
nature:—joying in the sunbeams basking upon sand, sharing the pleasures
of the wild life in the creatures of the woods,

                 “Where dwells enjoyment there is He;”

and so to conjecture that

                      “God tastes an infinite joy
                In infinite ways—one everlasting bliss
                From whom all being emanates, all power
                Proceeds; in whom is life for evermore.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                   X

                          COSMIC INTELLIGENCE


    _Q. 10.  Are there any beings higher in the scale of
    existence than man?_

    _A._ Man is the highest of the dwellers on the planet earth,
    but the earth is only one of many planets warmed by the sun,
    and the sun is only one of a myriad of similar suns, which
    are so far off that we barely see them, and group them
    indiscriminately as “stars.” We may reasonably conjecture
    that in some of the innumerable worlds circling round those
    distant suns there must be beings far higher in the scale of
    existence than ourselves; indeed, we have no knowledge which
    enables us to assert the absence of intelligence anywhere.




                  *       *       *       *       *


                                CLAUSE X

The existence of higher beings and of a Highest Being is a fundamental
element in every religious creed. There is no scientific reason for
imagining it possible that man is the highest intelligent
existence—there is no reason to suppose that we dwellers on this planet
know more about the universe than any other existing creature. Such an
idea, strictly speaking, is absurd. Science has investigated our
ancestry and shown that we are the product of planetary processes. We
may be, and surely must be, something more, but this we clearly are—a
development of life on this planet earth. Science has also revealed to
us an innumerable host of other worlds, and has relegated the earth to
its now recognised subordinate place as one of a countless multitude of
worlds.

Consider a spherical region bounded by the distance of the farthermost
stars visible in the strongest telescope, or say with a radius
corresponding to a parallax of one-thousandth of a second of arc, so
that the time taken by light to travel right across it is 6000
years:—Lord Kelvin, treating of such a portion of Universe, says:

“There may also be a large amount of matter in many stars outside the
sphere of 3×10^{16} kilometres radius, but however much matter there may
be outside it, it seems to be made highly probable, by §§ 11-21, that
the total quantity of matter within it is greater than 100 million
times, and less than 2000 million times, the sun’s mass” (_Philosophical
Magazine_, August 1901).

It does not follow that all this matter is distributed in masses like
our sun with its attendant planets; but, on the average, that is as
likely an arrangement as another, and it corresponds with what we know.

So, given, on this hypothesis, the existence of some thousand million
solar systems or families of worlds, within our ken, and knowing what we
do about the exuberant impulse towards vital development wherever it is
possible, we must conclude that those worlds contain life; and if so, it
is against all reasonable probability that the only world of which we
happen to know the details contains the creature highest in the entire
scale. It would be just as reasonable to imagine, what we happen to know
is false, that our particular sun is the largest, and our particular
planet the brightest of all, as it is to conjecture that this world is
the highest and best, or the only one in existence.

The self-glorifying instinct of the human mind has resented this
negative conclusion, and for long clung to the Ptolemaic idea that the
earth was no mere planet among a crowd of others, but was the centre of
the universe; and that the sun and all the stars were subsidiary to it.
A Ptolemaic idea clings to some of us still—not now as regards the
planet, but as regards man; and we, insignificant creatures, with senses
only just open to the portentous meaning of the starry sky, presume—some
of us—to deny the existence of higher powers and higher knowledge than
our own. We are accustomed to be careful as to what we assert; we are
liable to be unscrupulous as to what we deny. It is possible to find
people who, knowing nothing or next to nothing of the Universe, are
prepared to limit existence to that of which they have had experience,
and to measure the cosmos in terms of their own understanding. Their
confidence in themselves, their shut minds and self-satisfied hearts,
are things to marvel at. The fact is that no glimmer of a conception of
the real magnitude and complexity of existence can ever have illuminated
their cosmic view.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                   XI

                               IMMANENCE


    _Q. 11.  What caused and what maintains existence?_

    _A._ Of our own knowledge we are unable to realise the
    meaning of origination or of maintenance; all that we
    ourselves can accomplish in the physical world is to move
    things into desired positions, and leave them to act on each
    other. Nevertheless our effective movements are all inspired
    by thought, and so we conceive that there must be some
    Intelligence immanent in all the processes of nature, for
    they are not random or purposeless, but organised and
    beautiful.




                  *       *       *       *       *


                               CLAUSE XI

ORIGIN

We cannot conceive the origin of any fundamental existence. We can
describe the beginning of any particular object in its present shape,
but its substance always existed in some other shape previously; and
nothing really either springs into being or ceases to exist. A cloud or
dew becomes visible, and then evaporates, seeming to spring into being
and then vanish away; but as water vapour it had a past history and will
have a future, both apparently without limit. In our own case, and in
the case of any live thing, the history is unknown to us; but ultimate
origin or absolute beginning, save of individual collocations, is
unthinkable.

The truth that science teaches, on the one hand, is that everything is a
perpetual flux,

                       πάντα ῥεὶ ϰαὶ οὐδὲν μένει,

that nothing is permanent and fixed and unchangeable:

               “The hills are shadows, and they flow
               From form to form, and nothing stands;
               They melt like mists, the solid lands,
               Like clouds they shape themselves and go.”

On the other hand, we learn that, in its ultimate essence and reality,
everything is persistent and eternal; that it is the form alone that
changes, while the substance endures. No end and no beginning—a
continual Eternal Now—this is the scientific interpretation of I AM.

There are those who think that in the last resort the ultimate reality
will be found to be of the nature of Spirit, Consciousness, and Mind. It
may be so—it probably is so—but that is a teaching of Philosophy, not at
present of Science.

The teaching of religion may be summarised thus:

“All that exists, exists only by the communication of God’s infinite
being. All that has intelligence, has it only by derivation from His
sovereign reason; and all that acts, acts only from the impulse of His
supreme activity. It is He who does all in all; it is He who, at each
instant of our life, is the beating of our heart, the movement of our
limbs, the light of our eyes, the intelligence of our spirit, the soul
of our soul.”—_Fénelon._

MAINTENANCE

So also with regard to maintenance.

The multifarious processes around us—the succession of the seasons, the
flow of sap in trees, the circulation of our own blood, the digestion of
our food—all these things are beyond our power, and are not contrived or
managed by our conscious agency—not even the occurrences in our own
bodies. But by means of such unconscious processes our muscular and
nervous systems are supplied with nutriment, and we thus become master
of a certain amount of energy.

The energy of our muscles, or of some of them, is within our control,
and we can thereby direct other physical energies into desired channels;
but we cannot in the slightest degree alter the amount of that energy.
We utilise terrestrial energy, by directing and controlling its
transformations and transferences, within the limits of our knowledge;
but we do it always by moving material objects, and in no other way. For
instance, we cannot directly or consciously generate an electric
current, or magnetism, or light, or life; for all these things we depend
upon partially explored properties of matter, which we can arrange in a
certain way so as to achieve a desired end.

A multitude of complex processes are constantly occurring in our bodies
without any intervention of consciousness; and though we may make a
study of the functions of the several organs, and gradually learn
something about them, it is a study as of something outside ourselves;
the due performance of bodily function is independent of our volition.
We can interfere with and damage our organs, and with skill we can so
arrange damaged parts that the self-healing process shall have time and
opportunity to act; we can also introduce beneficent agencies and
stimulating drugs; but our power of direct action is practically limited
to muscular and mental activity.

                 _Digression on Rudimentary Physiology_

It is well for children to have some conception of the complex processes
constantly occurring in their own organisms.

The fact that the heart is a continuously acting pump, urging the blood
along arteries to the tissues,—to places where it picks up nutriment, to
places where the crudely enriched blood is oxidised, to places where the
elaborated material is deposited so as to replenish waste and effect
growth—all this should be known; and the partial analogy with the sap of
trees, rising in the trunk to be elaborated in the leaves by means of
sunshine and air, and then descending ready to be deposited as liquid
wood, can be pointed out.

The function of the lungs, wherein the blood dispersed throughout a
spongy texture is exposed in immense surface to the air, without loss or
leakage other than what properly transpires through the membranes, and
the consequent advantage of deep breathing and of fresh clean air,—all
this has a practical as well as a theoretical interest.

The lungs are more under voluntary control than the heart, but the way
exercise increases the circulation, and generally blows the fires of the
body, is also of practical interest.

Some idea of the processes of digestion can be given, especially the
function of the stomach and the intestines; the liver may be too
difficult, but the salivary glands are fairly simple, and so are the
kidneys and the skin. The way the muscles act as an efficient mechanical
engine, depending on the consumption of fuel and the conservation of
energy, can be superficially explained, with some idea of the
stimulating nervous system and controlling brain cells. The sensory
nerves and specialised nerve-endings demand specific treatment.

These and other physiological details may seem out of place, but they
are strictly appropriate; for the essence of Immanence is that nothing
is common or unclean, until abused: and the nobler the faculty, the
fouler is the degradation caused by its abuse. A sense of the
responsibility involved in the possession or lease of all this intricate
mass of mechanism, intrusted to our care, and the wish to keep it in
good order—without giving unnecessary trouble to others to set it right,
and without blaspheming the Maker by applying it to bad and ignoble
ends—will arise almost imperceptibly, when the body is even begun to be
understood. Many faults originate in ignorance and want of thought.

                            MIND AND MATTER

Among the material objects we move are the parts of our own bodies;
indeed, it is through muscular intervention or agency that we act on
bodies in general. We know of no other method. Even when we _speak_ we
are only moving certain face and throat and chest muscles, so as to
generate condensations and rarefactions in the air; which, travelling by
dynamical properties, excite corresponding vibrations or movements in
the ear drum of our auditor;—vibrations not in themselves intelligible,
but demanding interpretation from the recipient. So also it is with the
traces of ink left on paper by our muscular action when we write. Only
to a perceptive eye, and informed and kindred mind, have they any
meaning.

It is probable that even when we think, some special atomic motion goes
on in the brain cells, though this is an example of _unconscious_
movement, of which there are many examples in bodily function; but
directly we begin to attend to mental processes we leave the physical
region as understood by us, and enter a more deeply mysterious psychical
region. Unknown as this is for purposes of analysis, from the point of
view of experience it is more immediately familiar than any other; since
it is through the activity of mind that every other kind of existence is
necessarily inferred. Thought is our mechanism or instrument of
knowledge—through it we know everything—but thought is not what we
directly know. Primarily we think of _things_, not of thought itself. So
also sight is our instrument of seeing—through light we see—but it is
not light that we perceive, rather it is the objects which send it in
certain patterns to our eyes.

Whereas we can act on the external world only through our muscles; in
ourselves we are aware of things belonging to a totally different
category, with which muscle and movement and energy appear to have
nothing to do,—such things as thought, purpose, desire, humour,
affection, consciousness, will. These mental faculties seem intimately
associated with, and are displayed by, our bodily mechanism; but in
themselves they belong to a different order of being,—an order which
employs and dominates the material, while immersed or immanent in it.
Every purposed movement is preceded and inspired by thought.

Such reasoned control, by indwelling mind, may be undetectable and
inconceivable to a low order of intelligence, being totally masked by
the material garment; and the purpose underlying our activity may have
to be inferred, by such intelligence, with as great difficulty as we
feel in detecting indwelling Purpose amid the spontaneous operations of
Nature.

Nevertheless, whenever our movements are not controlled by thought and
intelligent purpose, but are left to chance and random impulses, like
the actions of a man whose reason has been unseated, nothing but error
and confusion results;—quite a different state of things from anything
we observe in the orderly and beautiful procedure of nature.

It is sometimes said that the operations of nature are spontaneous; and
that is exactly what they are. That is the meaning of immanence.
“Spontaneous,” used in this sense, does not mean random and purposeless
and undetermined: it means actuated and controlled from within, by
something indwelling and all pervading and not absent anywhere. The
intelligence which guides things is not something external to the
scheme, clumsily interfering with it by muscular action, as we are
constrained to do when we interfere at all; but is something within and
inseparable from it, as human thought is within and inseparable from the
action of our brains.

In some partially similar way we conceive that the multifarious
processes in nature, with neither the origin nor maintenance of which
have we had anything to do, must be guided and controlled by some
Thought and Purpose, immanent in everything, but revealed only to those
with sufficiently awakened perceptions. Many are blind to the meaning—to
the fact even that there is a meaning—in nature; just as an animal is
usually blind to a picture, and always to a poem; but to the higher
members of our race the Intelligence and Purpose, underlying the whole
mystery of existence, elaborating the details of evolution—and
ultimately tending to elucidate the frequent discords, the strange
humours, and puzzling contradictions of life—are keenly felt. To them
the lavish beauty of wild Nature—of landscape, of sunset, of mountain,
and of sea—are revelations of an indwelling Presence, rejoicing in its
own majestic order.

                           πάντα πλήρη θεῶν.

                 “Earth’s crammed with Heaven
                 And every common bush afire with God.”

The idea that the world as we know it arose by chance and fortuitous
concourse of atoms is one that no science really sustains, though such
an idea is the superficial outcome of an incipient recognition of the
uniformity of nature—a sequel to the perception that there is no
capricious or spasmodic interference with the course of events, and no
changes of purpose observable therein, such as we are accustomed to in
works of human ingenuity and skill. We are accustomed to associate
“will” with the degenerate form of it called caprice, and to consider
that “purpose” must be accompanied by changes of purpose; so that a
steady, uniform, persistent course of action is puzzling to us, and
wears the superficial aspect of mechanism. An omnipresent, uniform,
immanent Purpose, running through the whole of existence without break
of continuity or change of aim, is beyond our experience; and, like
every other uniformity, is difficult to detect or realise. As an
instance of this difficulty, I need only cite the long-delayed discovery
of an all-embracing medium-like the terrestrial atmosphere. An
intelligent deep-sea creature would find it most difficult to become
aware of the existence of water. Similarly humanity has existed all
along in a pervading and interpenetrating ether, of which to this day
men have for the most part no cognisance; although it is probably the
fundamental substratum of the whole material world, underlying every
kind of activity, and constituting the very atoms of which their own
bodies are composed.

Looking at the truths of geometry, the laws of nature, and the beauty
and organisation of the visible world, it is as impossible rationally to
suppose that they arose by chance, or by mere contentious jostling, as
it is to suppose that a work of literature or a piece of music was
composed in that way.

The process of evolution appears to us self-sustained and self-guided,
because the guidance is uniform and constant.

In nature, heredity and survival will explain the persistence of a
favourable variation when once originated, but the origin of variations
is still mysterious, and the full meaning of heredity is not yet
unravelled.

The struggle for existence has been one of the means whereby animal life
has been developed and perfected; but now that it has become conscious
and purposeful, in humanity, the apparently blind struggle is suspended
at the higher level, and the weak and suffering are attended to and
helped—not exterminated. There must always be disciplinary effort: but
it can be effort for something better than bare subsistence; it can
conduce to evolution of character, and development of soul. Mere
struggle and survival is an inferior instrument of progress, and it can
be superseded wherever it has done its necessary preliminary work. The
Divine purpose is fulfilled in many ways; and far more can be expected
of self-conscious evolution than of the long slow process which has
rendered it possible.

The kind of selection actually or best known to us is that which has
been directed by human beings; and inasmuch as the highest human beings
are themselves conscious of help and guidance, it is to be assumed that
such help and guidance has been in constant activity all along,
operating on, or rather in, the refractory materials, so as slowly to
develop in them the power of manifesting not only life and beauty, but
also consciousness, spiritual perception, and free will.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                  XII

                            SOUL AND SPIRIT


    _Q. 12.  What is to be said of man’s higher faculties?_

    _A._ The faculties and achievements of the highest among
    mankind—in Art, in Science, in Philosophy, and in
    Religion—are not explicable as an outcome of a struggle for
    existence. Something more than mere life is possessed by
    us—something represented by the words “mind” and “soul” and
    “spirit.” On one side we are members of the animal kingdom;
    on another we are associates in a loftier type of existence,
    and are linked with the Divine.




                  *       *       *       *       *


                               CLAUSE XII

The highest of those who have walked the earth reveal to us what we,
too, may some day be: they link us with the Divine, and teach us that,
however pathetically defaced by our infirmities and distorted by our
imperfections, we may yet reflect the image of God.

[_Part of the following explanation is based upon a study of certain
facts not yet fully incorporated into orthodox science, nor fully
recognised by philosophy: it must therefore be regarded as
speculation._]

This idea, which permeates literature—that man has a spiritual as well
as a material origin—emphasises from another point of view the doctrine
of the Fall. For the utilisation of a material body, of animal ancestry,
exposes the individual to much trial and temptation, and makes him aware
of a contest between the flesh and the spirit, or between a lower and a
higher self, which constitutes the element of truth in the otherwise
mistaken doctrine of “original,” or inherited, or imputed sin. Vicarious
sin is a legal fiction: so is vicarious punishment; vicarious suffering
is a reality. The mother of a ne’er-do-well knows it: it is undergone by
the children of vicious parents; the highest souls have felt it on
behalf of the race of man; but it is not artificial or imputed
suffering, it is genuine and real; and experience shows that it can have
a redeeming virtue.

The double nature of man,—the inherited animal tendencies, and the
inspired spiritual aspirations, if they can both be fully admitted,
reconcile many difficulties. Our body is an individual collocation of
cells, which began to form and grow together at a certain date, and will
presently be dispersed; but the constructing and dominating reality,
called our “soul,” did not then begin to exist; nor will it cease with
bodily decay. Interaction with the material world then began, and will
then cease, but we ourselves in essence are persistent and immortal.
Even our personality and individuality may be persistent, if our
character be sufficiently developed to possess a reality of its own. In
our present state, truly, the memory of our past is imperfect or
non-existent; but when we waken and shake off the tenement of matter,
our memory and consciousness may enlarge too, as we rejoin the larger
self of which only a part is now manifested in mortal flesh.

The ancient doctrine of a previous state of existence, of which we are
now entranced into forgetfulness, is inculcated in the familiar lines—

             “Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting;
             The Soul that rises with us, our life’s star,
               Hath had elsewhere its setting,
                 And cometh from afar:
               Not in entire forgetfulness,
               And not in utter nakedness,
             But trailing clouds of glory do we come
               From God, who is our home,”

the idea being that the forgetfulness is not complete, especially during
infancy; nor need it be complete in moments of inspiration. Myers’
doctrine of the subliminal self is an expanded and modified form of this
idea, and is to a large extent apparently justified by a certain range
of psychological inquiry: though Myers lays stress, not on memory of a
past, but on a present occasional intercommunication between the part
and the whole.

The Platonic doctrine of reminiscence exhibits one variety of the idea
of pre-existence, though in a necessarily inaccurate and somewhat
fanciful form—as though infants were a stage higher in the scale than
grown men. Such an idea would involve the old mistaken postulate of
initial perfection, which was made long ago concerning the race: whereas
the truth was innocency, not perfection. But the idea that nothing less
than the whole of a personality must be incarnated—even in the body of
an infant—leads to innumerable difficulties;—it does not even escape
unanswerable questions about trivialities such as the moment of arrival;
and it is responsible for much biological scepticism concerning the
existence of any soul at all. Whereas, on the strength of the experience
that all processes in nature are really gradual, the idea of gradual
incarnation—increasing as the brain and body grow, but never attaining
any approach to completeness even in the greatest of men—sets one above
innumerable petty difficulties, and to me seems an opening in the
direction of the truth. On this view, the portion of larger self
incarnated in an infant or a feeble-minded person is but small: in
normal cases, more appears as the body is fitted to receive it. In some
cases much appears, thus constituting a great man; while in others,
again, a link of occasional communication is left open between the part
and the whole—producing what we call “genius.” Second childishness is
the gradual abandonment of the material vehicle, as it gets worn out or
damaged. But, during the episode of this life, man is never a complete
self, his roots are in another order of being, he is moving about in
worlds not realised, he is as if walking in a vain shadow and
disquieting himself in vain.

It may be objected that our present existence is very far from being a
dream or trance-like condition, that we are very wide awake to the
“realities” of the world, and very keen about “things of importance”;
that an analogy drawn from the memories of hypnotic patients and
multiple personalities, and other pathological cases, is sure to be
misleading. It may be so, the idea is admittedly of the nature of
speculation; but the greatest of poets lends his countenance to the
notion that phenomena and appearances are not ultimate realities, that
our present life is not unlike the state of a sleep-walker—that we slept
to enter it, and must sleep again before we wake—

                                   “We are such stuff
               As dreams are made of, and our little life
               Is rounded with a sleep.”

As to the question whether we ever again live on earth, it appears
unlikely on this view that a given developed individual will appear
again in unmodified form. If my present self is a fraction of a larger
self, some other fraction of that larger self may readily be thought of
as appearing,—to gain practical experience in the world of matter, and
to return with developed character to the whole whence it sprang. And
this operation may be repeated frequently; but these hypothetical
fractional appearances can hardly be spoken of as reincarnations. We
must not dogmatise, however, on the subject, and the case of the
multitudes at present thwarted and returned at infancy may demand
separate treatment. It may be that the abortive attempts at development
on the part of individuals are like the waves lapping up the sides of a
boulder and being successively flung back; while the general advance of
the race is typified by the steady rising of the tide.

                            _Soul and Body_

The philosophic doctrine of the “self” on this view is a difficult one,
and involves much study. As here stated, the form is sure to be crude
and imperfect. Philosophy resents any sharp distinction between soul and
body, between indwelling self and material vehicle. It prefers to treat
the self as a whole, an individual unit; though it may admit the actual
agglomeration of material particles to be transient and temporary. The
word “self” can be used in a narrower or in a broader sense. It may
signify the actual continuity of personality and memory whereof we are
conscious; or it may signify a larger and vaguer underlying reality, of
which the conscious self is but a fraction. The narrower sense is wide
enough to include the whole man, both soul and body, as we know him; but
the phrase “subliminal self” covers ideas extending hypothetically
beyond that.

The idea of Redemption or Regeneration, in its highest and most
Christian form, is applicable to both soul and body. The life of Christ
shows us that the whole man can be regenerated as he stands; that we
have not to wait for a future state, that the Kingdom of Heaven is in
our midst and may be assimilated by us here and now.

The term “salvation” should not be limited to the soul, but should apply
to the whole man. What kind of transfiguration may be possible, _or may
have been possible_, in the case of a perfectly emancipated and
glorified body, we do not yet know.

In a still larger sense these terms apply to the whole race of man; and
for the salvation of mankind individual loss and suffering have been
gladly expended. Not the individual alone, but the race also, can be
adjured to realise some worthy object for all its striving, to open its
eyes to more glorious possibilities than it has yet perceived, to

           “... climb the Mount of Blessing, whence, if thou
           Look higher, then—perchance—thou mayest—beyond
           A hundred ever-rising mountain lines,
           And past the range of Night and Shadow—see
           The high-heaven dawn of more than mortal day
           Strike on the Mount of Vision!”

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                  XIII

                                 GRACE


    _Q. 13.  Is man helped in his struggle upward?_

    _A._ There is a Power in the Universe vastly beyond our
    comprehension; and we trust and believe that it is a Good
    and Loving Power, able and willing to help us and all
    creatures, and to guide us wisely, without detriment to our
    incipient freedom. This Loving-kindness continually
    surrounds us; in it we live and have our real being; it is
    the mainspring of joy and love and beauty, and we call it
    the Grace of God. It sustains and enriches all worlds, and
    may take a multiplicity of forms, but it was specially
    manifested to dwellers on this planet in the life of Jesus
    Christ, through whose spirit and living influence the race
    of man may hope to rise to heights at present inaccessible.




                  *       *       *       *       *


                              CLAUSE XIII

The guidance exercised by the Divine Spirit, by which we are completely
surrounded, is not of the nature of compulsion; it is only a leading and
helping influence, which we are able to resist if we choose.

The problem of manufacturing free creatures with a will of their own, to
be led, not forced, into right action, is a problem of a different
nature from any of those that have ever appealed to human power and
knowledge. What we are accustomed to make is mechanism, of various
kinds; and the essential difficulty of the higher problem is so obscure
to us that some impatient and unimaginative persons cry out against its
slowness, and wonder that everything is not compulsorily made perfect at
once. But we can see that the kind of perfection thus easily attainable
would be of an utterly inferior kind.

It is to be supposed that incarnation, or a connexion between
consciousness and material mechanism, is auxiliary to the difficult
process of evolution of free beings, thus indicated; and it is probable
that matter is thus an instrument of lofty spiritual purpose. Some
religious systems have failed to perceive this, and have depreciated
matter and flesh as intrinsically evil.

One important feature of Christianity is that it recognises as good the
connexion between spirit and matter, and emphasises the importance of
both, when properly regarded. It is not mystical and spiritual alone,
nor is it material alone; but it tends to unify these two extremes, and
to place in due position both soul and body: the material being utilised
to make manifest the spiritual, and being dominated by it.

The whole idea of the Incarnation, as well as some of the miracles and
the sacraments, are expressive of this wide and comprehensive character
of the Christian religion.

It recognises the wonder and beauty of the animal body, destined to be
the scene of extraordinary spiritual triumphs in the long course of
time; and it teaches

          “That none but Gods could build this house of ours,
          So beautiful, vast, various, so beyond
          All work of man, yet, like all work of man,
          A beauty with defect—till That which knows,
          And is not known, but felt thro’ what we feel
          Within ourselves is highest, shall descend
          On this half-deed, and shape it at the last
          According to the Highest in the Highest.”

Christianity is a planetary and human religion: being the revelation of
those aspects of Godhead which are most intelligible and helpful to us
in our present stage of development. But it is more than a revelation,
it is a manifestation of some of the attributes of Godhead in the form
of humanity.

The statement that Christ and God are one, is not really a statement
concerning Christ, but a statement concerning what we understand by God.
It is useless, and in the literal sense preposterous, to explain the
known in terms of the unknown: the converse is the right method. “He
that hath seen me hath seen the Father.” Every son of man is potentially
also a son of God, but the union was deepest and completest in the
Galilean.

The ideas of incarnation and revelation are not confined to the domain
of religion; they are common to music and letters and science: in all we
recognise “a flash of the will that can,”

  “All through my keys that gave their sounds to a wish of my soul,
  All through my soul that praised, as the wish flowed visibly forth.”

The spirit of Beethoven is incarnate in his music; and he that hath
heard the Fifth Symphony hath heard Beethoven.

The Incarnation of the Divine Spirit in man is the central feature of
Terrestrial History. It is through man, and the highest man, that the
revelation of what is meant by Godhead must necessarily come. The
world—even the common everyday world—has accepted this, and is able to
perceive its appropriateness and truth; and the traditional song of the
angels, at the epoch of the Birth—

 “Glory to God in the highest; and on earth peace, goodwill among men,”

is still heard in the land. Whenever there is war at Christmas-time it
is universally felt to be incongruous. Goodwill among men is conspicuous
in cessation of private feuds, in overladen postbags, in family reunions
and Christmas hampers and all manner of homely frivolities.

The Incarnation doctrine is the glorification of human effort, and the
sanctification of childhood and simplicity of life; but it is a pity to
reduce it to a dogma. It is well to leave something to intuitive
apprehension, and to let the life and death of Christ gradually teach
their own eloquent lesson without premature dogmatic assistance.

From that event we date our history, and the strongest believer in
immanent Godhead can admit that the life of Jesus was an explicit and
clear-voiced message of love to this planet from the Father of all.
Naturally our conception of Godhead is still only indistinct and
partial, but, so far as we are as yet able to grasp it, we must reach it
through recognition of the extent and intricacy of the Cosmos, and more
particularly through the highest type and loftiest spiritual development
of man himself.

The most essential element in Christianity is its conception of a human
God; of a God, in the first place, not apart from the Universe, not
outside it and distinct from it, but immanent in it; yet not immanent
only, but actually incarnate, incarnate in it and revealed in the
Incarnation. The nature of God is displayed in part by everything, to
those who have eyes to see, but is displayed most clearly and fully by
the highest type of existence, the highest experience to which the
process of evolution has so far opened our senses.

                                 “’Tis the sublime of man,
             Our noontide majesty, to know ourselves
             Part and proportion of one wondrous whole.”

The Humanity of God, the Divinity of man, is the essence of the
Christian revelation. It was truly a manifestation of Immanuel.

The Christian idea of God is not that of a being outside the universe,
above its struggles and advances, looking on and taking no part in the
process, _solely_ exalted, beneficent, self-determined, and complete. It
is also that of a God who loves, who yearns, who suffers, who keenly
laments the rebellious and misguided activity of the free agents brought
into being by Himself as part of Himself, who enters into the storm and
conflict, and is subject to conditions as the soul of it all.

This is the truth which has been reverberating down the ages ever since;
it has been the hidden inspiration of saint, apostle, prophet, martyr,
and, in however dim and vague a form, has given hope and consolation to
the unlettered and poverty-stricken millions:—A God that could
understand, that could suffer, that could sympathise, that had felt the
extremity of human anguish, the agony of bereavement, had submitted even
to the brutal hopeless torture of the innocent, and had become
acquainted with the pangs of death—this has been the chief consolation
of the Christian religion. This is the extraordinary conception of
Godhead to which we have thus far risen. “This is My beloved Son.”

“Enough that he heard it once; we shall hear it by and by.” The
Christian God is revealed as the incarnate Spirit of humanity; or rather
the incarnate spirit of humanity is recognised as a real intrinsic part
of God. “The Kingdom of Heaven is within you.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                  XIV

                              INSPIRATION


    _Q. 14.  How may we become informed concerning things too
    high for our own knowledge?_

    _A._ We should strive to learn from the great teachers, the
    prophets and poets and saints of the human race, and should
    seek to know and to interpret their inspired writings.




                  *       *       *       *       *


                               CLAUSE XIV

People at a low stage of development are liable to think that they can
arrive at truth by their unaided judgment and insight, and that they
need not concern themselves with the thoughts and experiences of the
past. Unconscious of any inspiration themselves, they decline to believe
in the possibility of such a thing, and regard it as a fanciful notion
of unpractical and dreamy people.

Great men, on the other hand, are the fingerposts and lodestars of
humanity; it is with their aid that we steer our course, if we are wise,
and the records of their thought and inspiration are of the utmost value
to us.

This is the meaning of literature in general, and of that mass of
ancient religious literature in particular, on which hundreds of
scholars have bestowed their best energies: now translated, bound
together, and handed down to us as the Canon of Scripture, of which some
portions are the most inspired writings yet achieved by humanity. It is
impossible for us to ignore the concurrent mass of human testimony
therein recorded, the substantial and general truth of which has been
vouched for by the prophets and poets and seers of all time.
Accordingly, if we are to form worthy beliefs regarding the highest
conceptions in the Universe, we must avail ourselves of all this
testimony; discriminating and estimating its relative value in the light
of our own judgment and experience, studying such works and criticism as
are accessible to us, asking for the guidance of the Divine Spirit, and
seeking with modest and careful patience to apprehend something in the
direction of the truth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                   XV

                                A CREED

    _Q. 15.  What, then, do you reverently believe can be
    deduced from a study of the records and traditions of the
    past in the light of the present?_

    _A._ I believe in one Infinite and Eternal Being, a guiding
    and loving Father, in whom all things consist.

    I believe that the Divine Nature is specially revealed to
    man through Jesus Christ our Lord, who lived and taught and
    suffered in Palestine 1900 years ago, and has since been
    worshipped by the Christian Church as the immortal Son of
    God, the Saviour of the world.

    I believe that the Holy Spirit is ever ready to help us
    along the Way towards Goodness and Truth; that prayer is a
    means of communion between man and God; and that it is our
    privilege through faithful service to enter into the Life
    Eternal, the Communion of Saints, and the Peace of God.




                  *       *       *       *       *


                               CLAUSE XV

                           NOTES ON THE CREED

The three paragraphs correspond to the three aspects or Personifications
of Deity which have most impressed mankind,—   The Creating and
Sustaining.   The Sympathising and Suffering.   The Regenerating and
Sanctifying. The first of the three clauses tries to indicate briefly
the cosmic, as well as the more humanly intelligible, attributes of
Deity; and to suggest an idea of creation appropriate to the doctrine of
Divine Immanence, as opposed to the anthropomorphic notion of
manufacture. The idea of evolution by guiding and controlling Purpose is
suggested, as well as the vital conception of Fatherly Love.

                  *       *       *       *       *

In the second paragraph, Time and Place are explicitly mentioned in
order to emphasise the historical and human aspect of the Christian
manifestation of Godhead. This aspect is essential and easy to
appreciate, though its idealisation and full interpretation are
difficult. The step, from the bare historic facts to the idealisation of
the Fourth Gospel, has been the work of the Church, in the best sense of
that word, aided by the doctrines of the Logos and of Immanence,
elaborated by Philosophy. It all hangs together, when properly grasped,
and constitutes a luminous conception; but the light thus shed upon the
nature of Deity must not blind our eyes to the simple human facts from
which it originally emanated. The clear and undoubted fact is that the
founder of the Christian religion lived on this earth a blameless life,
taught and helped the poor who heard him gladly, gathered to himself a
body of disciples with whom he left a message to mankind, and was put to
death as a criminal blasphemer, at the instigation of mistaken priests
in the defence of their own Order and privileges.

This monstrous wrong is regarded by some as having unconsciously
completed the salvation of the race; because of the consummation of
sacrifice, and because of the suffering of the innocent, which it
involved. The Jewish sacrificial system, and the priestly ceremony of
the scapegoat, seem to lead up to that idea; which was elaborated by St.
Paul with immense genius, and taught by S. Augustine.

Others attach more saving efficacy to the life, the example, and the
teachings, as recorded in the Gospels; and all agree that they are
important.

But in fact the whole is important: and at the foot of the Cross there
has been a perennial experience of relief and renovation. Sin being the
sense of imperfection, disunion, lack of harmony, the struggle among the
members that St. Paul for all time expressed;—there is usually
associated with it a sense of impotence, a recognition of the
impossibility of achieving peace and unity in one’s own person, a
feeling that aid must be forthcoming from a higher source. It is this
feeling which enables the spectacle of any noble self-sacrificing human
action to have an elevating effect, it is this which gropes after the
possibilities of the highest in human nature, it is a feeling which for
large tracts of this planet has found its highest stimulus and
completest satisfaction in the life and death of Christ.

The willingness of such a Being to share our nature, to live the life of
a peasant, and to face the horrible certainty of execution by torture,
in order personally to help those whom he was pleased to call his
brethren, is a race-asset which, however masked and overlaid with
foreign growths, yet gleams through every covering and suffuses the
details of common life with fragrance.

This conspicuously has been a redeeming, or rather a regenerating,
agency;—for by filling the soul with love and adoration and
fellow-feeling for the Highest, the old cravings have often been almost
hypnotically rendered distasteful and repellent, the bondage of sin has
been loosened from many a spirit, the lower entangled self has been
helped from the slough of despond and raised to the shores of a larger
hope, whence it can gradually attain to harmony and peace.

The invitation to the troubled soul—“Come, and find rest”—has reference,
not to relief from sin alone, but to all restlessness and lack of trust.
The Atonement removes the feeling of dislocation; it induces a tranquil
sense of security and harmony,—an assurance of union with the Divine
will.

Every form of Christianity aims at salvation for the race and for each
individual, both soul and body; but different versions differ as to the
means most efficient to this end. Varieties of Christianity can be
grouped under the symbolic names, Paul, James, Peter, and John; with the
dominating ideas of vicarious sacrifice, human effort, Church ordinance,
and loving-kindness, respectively.

In the coldest system of nomenclature these four chief varieties may be
styled, _legal_, _ethical_, _ecclesiastical_, and _emotional_,
respectively. More favourably regarded, the dominating ideas may be
classified thus:—

           1. Faith in a divine scheme of redemption.

           2. Simple life, social service, honesty, and virtue.

           3. Spiritual sustenance by utilisation of means of
              grace.

           4. Obedience, unworldliness, trust, and love.

With the treatment of these great themes, sectarian differences begin:
differences which seem beyond our power to reconcile. We need not dwell
on the differences, we would rather emphasise the mass of agreement.
Probably there is an element of truth in every view that has long been
held and found helpful by human beings, however overlaid with
superstition it may in some cases have become; and probably also the
truth is far from exhausted by any one estimate of the essential feature
of a Life which most of us can agree to recognise as a revelation of the
high-water-mark of manhood, and a manifestation of the human attributes
of God.

None of the above partially overlapping subdivisions of Christianity
equals in importance the overshadowing and dominating theory emphasised
in the above creed: namely, the idea of a veritable incarnation of
Divine Spirit—a visible manifestation of Deity immanent in humanity. The
facts of the life, testified to by witnesses and idealised by
philosophers and saints, have been transmitted down the centuries by a
continuous Church; though with a mingling of superstition and error.

At present the process of interpretation has been accompanied by a sad
amount of discord and hostility, to the scandal of the Church; but the
future of religion shall not always be endangered by suspicion and
intolerance and narrowness among professed disciples of truth. There
must come a time when first a nation, and afterwards the civilised
world, shall awake and glory in the light of the risen sun:—

                                      “—A sun but dimly seen
            Here, till the mortal morning mists of earth
            Fade in the noon of heaven, when creed and race
            Shall bear false witness, each of each, no more,
            But find their limits by that larger light,
            And overstep them, moving easily
            Thro’ after-ages in the love of Truth,
            The truth of Love.”

The emphasis laid by the above explanation on the conception of the
human nature incorporated into Godhead, is appropriate to this country
and to the Western World generally; but we thereby imply no abuse of the
religions of the East, in their proper place, any more than of the
religions of other planets. Silence concerning them is not
disrespectful. It is not to be supposed that any one world has a
monopoly of the Grace of God; nor does it exhaust every plan of
salvation. In estimating the value of another dispensation, or of any
ill-understood religion (and no one can perfectly understand and
appreciate more than one religion, if that, to the full), the old test
is the only valid one: Do men gather grapes of thorns or figs of
thistles?

                  *       *       *       *       *

The third paragraph speaks of our progress along the Way of Truth to
goodness and beauty of Life, and of the assistance constantly vouchsafed
to our own efforts in that direction. It is not by our own efforts alone
that we can succeed, for we cannot tell what lies before us, and we lack
wisdom to foresee the consequences of alternative courses of action,—one
of which nevertheless we instinctively feel to be right. Acts of
self-will, and fanatical determination, and impatience, may operate in
the wrong direction altogether; and effort so expended may be worse than
wasted. But if we submit ourselves wholly to a beneficent Power, and
seek not our own ends but the ends of the Guiding Spirit of all things,
we shall obtain peace in ourselves, and may hope to be used for purposes
beyond what we can ask or think. This kind of service is what, in its
several degrees, will be recognised by the Master as “faithful”; and it
is by being faithful in a few things that hereafter we shall be found
worthy of many things, and shall enter into the joy of our Lord.

By the Holy Spirit is meant the living and immanent Deity at work in the
consciousness and experience of mankind,—the guider of human history,
the comforter of human sorrow, the revealer of truth, the inspirer of
faith and hope and love, the producer of life and joy and beauty, the
sustainer and enricher of existence, the Impersonation of the Grace of
God.

This mighty theme has been treated, in an initial manner, in connexion
with Clause XIII.

Supplementary questions will be asked concerning other terms in the
third paragraph; but as to the phrase with which the Creed concludes—the
Peace of God,—its meaning, we are well assured, surpasses understanding,
and can be felt only by experience; hence no supplementary question is
asked concerning that phrase.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                  XVI

                            THE LIFE ETERNAL


    _Q. 16.  What do you mean by the Life Eternal?_

    _A._ I mean that, whereas our terrestrial existence is
    temporary, our real existence continues without ceasing, in
    either a higher or a lower form, according to our use of
    opportunities and means of grace; and that the fulness of
    Life ultimately attainable represents a growing perfection
    at present inconceivable by us.




                  *       *       *       *       *


                               CLAUSE XVI

Continuity of existence, without break or interruption, is the
fundamental idea that needs inculcation, not only among children but
among ignorant people generally. And the survival, from savage times, of
an inclination to associate a full measure of departed personality with
the discarded and decomposing bodily remnant,—under the impression that
it will awake and live again at some future day,—should be steadily
discouraged. The idea of bodily resurrection, in this physical sense, is
responsible for much superstition and for some ecclesiastical abuses.

A nearer approach to the truth may be expressed thus:—

Terrestrial existence is dependent for its continuance on a certain
arrangement of material particles belonging to the earth, which are
gradually collected and built up into the complex and constantly
changing structure called a body. The correspondence or connection
between matter and spirit, as thus exhibited, is common to every form of
life in some degree, and is probably a symbol or sample of something
permanently true; so that a double aspect of every fundamental existence
is likely always to continue. But identity of person in no way depends
upon identity of particles: the particles are frequently changed and the
old ones discarded.

The term “body” should be explained and emphasised, as connoting
anything which is able to manifest feelings, emotions, and thoughts, and
at the same time to operate efficiently on its environment. The
temporary character of the present human body should be admitted for
purposes of religion; it usefully and truthfully displays the incarnate
part of us during the brief episode of terrestrial life, and when it has
served its turn it is left behind, its particles being discarded and
dispersed. Hereafter—we are taught—an equally efficient vehicle of
manifestation, similarly appropriate to our new environment, will not be
lacking; this at present unknown and hypothetical entity is spoken of as
“a spiritual body,” and represents the serious idea underlying crude
popular notions about bodily resurrection.

The _ego_ has been likened to a ripple raised by wind upon water,
displaying in visible form the motion and influence of the operating
breath, without being permanently differentiated from the vast whole, of
which each ripple is a temporarily individualised portion:
individualised, yet not isolated from others, but connected with them by
the ocean, of whose immensity it may be supposed for poetic purposes
gradually to become aware:—

              “But that one ripple on the boundless deep
              Feels that the deep is boundless, and itself
              For ever changing form, but evermore
              One with the boundless motion of the deep.”

There is much to be said for some form of doctrine of a common
psychological basis or union of minds—some kind of Anima Mundi, some
World-Mind, of which we are all fragments, and to which all knowledge is
in a manner accessible; but the analogy of ocean ripples or icebergs
need not be pressed to support the idea of a cessation of individual
existence, when a given ripple or a given iceberg subsides. All
analogies fail at some point. The ocean analogy happens to suggest
indistinguishable absorption, or Nirvana, but others do not. The parts
of a jelly are linked together and vibrate as a whole, but each little
sac of fluid is partitioned off as an individual entity; in touch with
all the rest, but with a texture and a colour of its own.

Continued personality, persistent individual existence, cannot be
predicated of things which do not possess personality or individuality
or character: but, to things which do possess these attributes,
continuity and persistence not only may, but must, apply; unless we are
to suppose that actual existence suddenly ceases. There must be a
conservation of character; notwithstanding the admitted return of the
individual to a central store or larger self, from which a portion was
differentiated and individualised for the brief period during which the
planet performs some seventy of its innumerable journeys round the sun.
Absorption in original source may mask, but need not destroy, identity.

Even so a villager, picked out as a recruit and sent to the seat of war,
may serve his country, may gain experience, acquire a soul and a width
of horizon such as he had not dreamt of; and when he returns, after the
war is over, may be merged as before in his native village. But the
village is the richer for his presence, and his individuality or
personality is not really lost; though to the eye of the world, which
has no further need for it, it has practically ceased to be.

The character and experience gained by us during our brief association
with the matter of this planet, become our possession henceforth for
ever. We cannot shake ourselves free of them, even if we would: the
enlargement of ideas, the growth in knowledge, the acquisition of
friendships, the skill and power and serviceableness attained by us
through this strange experience of incarnation, all persist as part and
parcel of our larger self; and so do the memories of failure, of shame,
of cruelty, of sin, which we have acquired here. To glory in these last
things is damnation: the best that they can bring to us is pain and
undying remorse—their worm dieth not and the fire is not quenched. There
is no way out, save by the way of mercy and grace; whereby we are
assured that at last, in the long last, we may ultimately attain to
pardon and peace.

The class of things which is certainly not persistent, but must
indubitably be left behind us for ever, is the weird collection of
treasures for which most of us work so hard: scorning delights and
living laborious days for their acquisition.

In this blind and mistaken struggle—a struggle which in the present
condition of society seems so unavoidable, even so meritorious, but
which in a reformed society will be looked back upon as at something
akin to lunacy—we do not even make to ourselves friends of the mammon of
unrighteousness. Its mottoes are “each for himself” and “væ victis.”
Fortunately very few of the human race wholly succumb to this
temptation; nearly all reserve great regions of their lives where
kindness and friendliness and affection reign, and try to check the evil
results of their worser or self-directed efforts by charitable doles.

In a more ideal state of society there would be no need either of the
poison or of its antidote.

To bring about such an ideal state of society is the end and aim of
Politics, and of all movements for social reform. Efforts in these
directions are the most serious things in life, and may be the most
fruitful in vital results: since few individuals are strong enough
to withstand the pressure and tendency of their social surroundings.
Only a few can rise superior to them, only a few sink far beneath
them; the majority drift with the crowd and become—too many at
present—irretrievably injured by the base and ugly conditions among
which their lives are cast.

At present, for the majority of Englishmen, life is liable to be
damaging and deleterious: initial weakness of character, so far from
being strengthened and helped by the combined force of society, is
hindered and enfeebled thereby,—a disastrous and disquieting condition
of things. But when the efforts of self-sacrificing and laborious
statesmen, Ministers in the highest sense (Mark x. 43),—when these
efforts at cultivation bear fruit,—then, notwithstanding individual
lapses here and there, society at large will be indistinguishable from a
human branch of the Communion of Saints. Then will feeble impulses
towards virtue be fostered and encouraged; the bruised reed will no
longer be broken and trampled in the mire.

The Life Eternal in its fullest sense must be entered upon here and now.
The emphasis is on the word _Life_, without reference to time. “I am
come that ye might have Life.” Life of a far higher kind than any we yet
know is attainable by the human race on this planet. It rests largely
with ourselves. The outlook was never brighter than it is to-day; many
workers and thinkers are making ready the way for a Second Advent,—a
reincarnation of the Logos in the heart of all men; the heralds are
already attuning their songs for a reign of brotherly love; already
there are “signs of his coming and sounds of his feet”; and upon our
terrestrial activity the date of this Advent depends.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                  XVII

                        THE COMMUNION OF SAINTS


    _Q. 17.  What is the significance of the “Communion of
    Saints”?_

    _A._ Higher and holier beings must possess, in fuller
    fruition, those privileges of communion which are already
    foreshadowed by our own faculties of language, of sympathy,
    and of mutual aid; and as we find that man’s power of
    friendly help is not confined to his fellows, but extends to
    other animals, so may we conceive ourselves part of a mighty
    Fellowship of love and service.




                  *       *       *       *       *


                              CLAUSE XVII

Here is opened up a great subject on which much remains to be
discovered. It is probable that the action of the Deity throughout the
Universe is always conducted through intermediaries and agents. In all
cases that we can examine, it is so; and this is one of the many
meanings of “Immanence.”

Humanity is the most prominent, to us, among Divine agencies, and though
it is probably only an infinitesimal fraction of the whole, yet it can
be studied as a sample. Experience shows us that human beings have
feelings of sympathy, pity, and love, and can be moved to act in certain
ways by persistent urging and by definite requests. There is no reason
to suppose that this faculty of hearing and answering is limited to our
own comparatively lowly stage of existence. Man may be regarded as a
germ or indication of far more powerful agencies, of which at present we
know very little.

The faculty of communion familiarly possessed by man is not likely to be
exhaustive of all possible methods of mental and spiritual intercourse;
and, in the undeveloped power of telepathy, we have an indication of a
mode apparently not dependent on the machinery of physical processes,
and not necessarily limited to intelligences inhabiting the surface of a
planet. Why associate mind only with the surface of a mass of matter?
Enthusiasts hope some day to be able to communicate with people on Mars,
but there may be intelligences far more accessible to us than those
remote and hypothetical denizens of another world. The immanent Spirit
of nature is likely to individualise and personify itself in ways
mysterious and unknown: all manner of possibilities lie open to our
study and examination; and—until we have scrutinised the evidence, and
thought long and deeply on the subject—our negative opinion, based upon
long habit and tradition, must not be allowed undue weight. It must be
remembered that the above is speculation, not knowledge; yet something
like it has received the sanction of great philosophers. Here is an
exclamation of Hegel:—

“We do not mean to be behind; our watchword shall be Reason and Freedom,
and our rallying ground the Invisible Church.”

So far our eyes are open to perceive only the assiduous operations of
man; and any supposed influence of other agencies we regard with
suspicion and mistrust. Some are inclined to think that man is solitary
in the universe, the highest of created things; without equal, without
superior, without companionship; alone with his indomitable soul amid
scenes of unspeakable grandeur and awe; alone with his brethren in a
universe wherein no spark of feeling, no gleam of intelligence, can be
aroused by his unuttered longings, no echo of sympathy can respond to
his bewildered need.

Yet that is not the feeling which arises during spells of lonely
communion with nature, on rock or sea or trackless waste. At these
moments comes a sense of Presence, such as Wordsworth felt at Tintern,
or Byron when he wrote:

               “Then stirs the feeling infinite, so felt
               In solitude, where we are _least_ alone.”

Until our senses are opened more widely, scepticism concerning spiritual
beings, as intermediate links with absolute Deity, may be our safest
attitude, for ignorance is better than superstition; but the seers of
the human race have surmised that as denizens of a higher universe we
are far from lonely, that it is only our limited perception that is at
fault, and that to clearer eyes the whole of nature is transfused with
spirit: ἡ φυχὴ τῷ ὅλῳ μέμιϰται,

             “Whose dwelling is the light of setting suns,
             And the round ocean and the living air,
             And the blue sky, and in the mind of man.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                 XVIII

                       MYSTIC COMMUNION OR PRAYER


    _Q. 18.  What do you understand by prayer?_

    _A._ I understand that when our spirits are attuned to the
    Spirit of Righteousness, our hopes and aspirations exert an
    influence far beyond their conscious range, and in a true
    sense bring us into communion with our Heavenly Father. This
    power of filial communion is called prayer; it is an
    attitude of mingled worship and supplication; we offer
    petitions in a spirit of trust and submission, and endeavour
    to realise the Divine attributes, with the help and example
    of Christ.




                  *       *       *       *       *


                              CLAUSE XVIII

In prayer we come into close communion with a Higher than we know, and
seek to contemplate Divine perfection. Its climax and consummation is
attained when we realise the universal Permeance, the entire Goodness,
and the Fatherly Love, of the Divine Being. Through prayer we admit our
dependence on a Higher Power, for existence and health and everything we
possess; we are encouraged to ask for whatever we need, as children ask
parents; and we inevitably cry for mercy and comfort in times of
tribulation and anguish.

The spirit of simple supplication may desire chiefly—

           1. Insight and receptiveness to truth and knowledge.

           2. Help and guidance in the practical management of
              life.

           3. Ability and willingness to follow the light
              whithersoever it leads.

But provided we ask in a right spirit, it is not necessary to be
specially careful concerning the kind of things asked for; nor need we
in all cases attempt to decide how far their attainment is possible or
not. In such matters we may admit our ignorance. What is important is
that we should apply our own efforts towards the fulfilment of our
petition, and not be satisfied with wishes alone. Everything
accomplished has to be done by actual work and activity of some kind,
and it is unreasonable to expect the rest of the universe to take
trouble on our behalf while we ourselves are supine. Certain material
means are within our control: these should be fully employed, in the
light of the best knowledge of the time.

The highest type of prayer has for its object not any material benefit,
beyond those necessary for our activity and usefulness, but the
enlightenment and amendment of our wills, the elevation of all humanity,
and the coming of the Kingdom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                  XIX

                           THE LORD’S PRAYER


    _Q._ _Rehearse the prayer taught us by Jesus._

    _A._

    OUR FATHER WHICH ART IN HEAVEN,
    HALLOWED BE THY NAME.
    THY KINGDOM COME.
    THY WILL BE DONE IN EARTH, AS IT IS IN HEAVEN.
    GIVE US THIS DAY OUR DAILY BREAD.
    AND FORGIVE US OUR TRESPASSES,
        AS WE FORGIVE THEM THAT TRESPASS AGAINST US.
    AND LEAD US NOT INTO TEMPTATION; BUT DELIVER US FROM EVIL:
      FOR THINE IS THE KINGDOM,
      AND THE POWER,
      AND THE GLORY,
      FOR EVER.




                  *       *       *       *       *


                               CLAUSE XIX

    _Q. 19. Explain the purport of this prayer._

    _A._ We first attune our spirit to consciousness of the
    Divine Fatherhood; trying to realise His infinite holiness
    as well as His loving-kindness, desiring that everything
    alien to His will should cease in our hearts and in the
    world, and longing for the establishment of the Kingdom of
    Heaven. Then we ask for the supply of the ordinary needs
    of existence, and for the forgiveness of our sins and
    shortcomings as we pardon those who have hurt us. We pray
    to be kept from evil influences, and to be protected when
    they attack us. Finally, we repose in the might, majesty,
    and dominion of the Eternal Goodness.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                   XX

                         THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN


    _Q. 20.  What is meant by the Kingdom of Heaven?_

    _A._ The Kingdom of Heaven is the central feature of
    practical Christianity. It represents a harmonious condition
    in which the Divine Will is perfectly obeyed; it signifies
    the highest state of existence, both individual and social,
    which we can conceive. Our whole effort should, directly or
    indirectly, make ready its way,—in our hearts, in our lives,
    and in the lives of others. It is the ideal state of society
    towards which Reformers are striving; it is the ideal of
    conscious existence towards which Saints aim.




                  *       *       *       *       *


                               CLAUSE XX

This mighty ideal has many aspects. It has been typified as the pearl of
great price, for which all other possessions may well be sacrificed: in
germ it is as leaven, or as growing seed. It will come sooner than is
expected, though for a time longer there must be tares among the wheat:
for a time longer there shall be last and first, and a striving to be
greatest, and a laying up of earthly treasure, and wars and divisions;
but only for a time,—the spirit of service is growing, and the childlike
spirit will overcome:

“Fear not, little flock; for it is your Father’s good pleasure to give
you the Kingdom.”

When realised, it will conduce to universal love and brotherhood; it is
the reign of Christ’s spirit in the hearts of all men; it is accordingly
spoken of as the second Advent, and its herald song is still, Peace on
earth, goodwill among men. Wherever perfect love and willing service
exist, there already is the Kingdom.

We have to realise that the Will of God is to be done on earth, that the
Kingdom of Heaven is to be a present Kingdom, here and now, not
relegated indefinitely to the future. Our life is not in the future, but
in the present, and it will always be in the present: it is in our life
that we have to apply our beliefs, utilise our talents, and bring forth
fruit. The Kingdom of Heaven is not only at hand, it is potentially in
our midst, and may be actually within us. These are its two chief
aspects, the social, and the individual. The ideal is to be made real,
in each and in all: nothing is too good to be true: each soul is to
attain its highest aim: the world is to be transfigured and transformed.

The above formula must not be supposed to exhaust the meaning of the
great Phrase, which many parables have still only partially explained,
but it is a part of its meaning. And the strange thing is that the
world, with all its competition, wrestling and contending amid unheeded
calls to order, is really working towards that goal. No other ending is
possible in the long run, though it has been long delayed. It is the
condition towards which the whole of humanity, each individual man, as
well as the race, is blindly and unconsciously struggling;

            “Their prejudice and fears and cares and doubts
            All with a touch of nobleness; despite
            Their error, upward tending all, though weak,
            Like plants in mines which never saw the sun,
            But dream of him and guess where he may be,
            And do their best to climb and get to him.”

The daily toil, in city office, in factory, in ship, in mine, in home,
is really a struggle for Life, for freedom, for joy, for something wider
and better than we at present know, for pleasures that satisfy and do
not pall. We needs must love the highest when we see it, but as yet we
do not see it: so we are working in the dark, and the best of us try
hard to do our duty. The end is unrecognised, the means may be mistaken,
but the energy is there; and the race as well as the individual is
instinctively working out its destiny;—thwarting itself constantly by
misdirected endeavour, yet constantly striving for self-development and
enlargement, for progress and happiness. And this is true even when the
main idea of enlargement is the amassing of money in unwieldy heaps,
when happiness is sought in an exaltation of imagination by deleterious
drugs, or when progress is thought to consist in the slaughter and
impoverishment of opponents who might be our auxiliaries and allies.

If our vision could be cleared, and the aim of human effort could be
changed, the earth would put on a new complexion; we should no longer be
tempted to think of humanity as of an ancient and effete and played-out
product of evolution,—we the latest-born and most youthful of all the
creatures on the planet,—but should regard everything with the eye of
hope, as of one new born, with senses quickened to perceive joys and
beauties hitherto undreamt of.

That is the meaning of Regeneration or new birth: it must be like an
awakening out of trance. At present we are as if subject to a dream
illusion, in a slumber which we are unable to throw off. Revelation
after revelation has come to us, but our senses are deadened and we will
not hear, our hands are full of clay, we have no grasp for ideals, we
are mistaking appearance for reality. But the time for awakening must be
drawing nigh—the time when again it may be said: “The people that walked
in darkness have seen a great light: they that dwell in the land of the
shadow of death, upon them hath the light shined.”

Meanwhile our seers depict man’s half-hoping half-despairing attitude,
not so much as a striving, as a waiting:—the striving is obvious, but
the unconscious waiting is what they detect—waiting as it were for the
arrival of a new sense, a new perception of the value of life:—

             “And we, the poor earth’s dying race, and yet
             No phantoms, watching from a phantom shore
             Await the last and largest sense to make
             The phantom walls of this illusion fade,
             And show us that the world is wholly fair.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                 THE CLAUSES OF THE CATECHISM REPEATED




------------------------------------------------------------------------

                             THE CATECHISM


_Q. 1.  What are you?_

_A._ I am a being alive and conscious upon this earth, a descendant of
ancestors who rose by gradual processes from lower forms of animal life,
and with struggle and suffering became man.


_Q. 2.  What, then, may be meant by the Fall of man?_

_A._ At a certain stage of development man became conscious of a
difference between right and wrong, so that thereafter, when his actions
fell below a normal standard of conduct, he felt ashamed and sinful. He
thus lost his animal innocency, and entered on a long period of human
effort and failure; nevertheless, the consciousness of degradation
marked a rise in the scale of existence.


_Q. 3.  What is the distinctive character of manhood?_

_A._ The distinctive character of man is that he has a sense of
responsibility for his acts, having acquired the power of choosing
between good and evil, with freedom to obey one motive rather than
another. Creatures far below the human level are irresponsible; they
feel no shame and suffer no remorse; they are said to have no
conscience.


_Q. 4.  What is the duty of man?_

_A._ To assist his fellows, to develop his own higher self, to strive
towards good in every way open to his powers, and generally to seek to
know the laws of Nature and to obey the will of God; in whose service
alone can be found that harmonious exercise of the faculties which is
identical with perfect freedom.


_Q. 5.  What is meant by good and evil?_

_A._ Good is that which promotes development, and is in harmony with the
will of God. It is akin to health and beauty and happiness.

Evil is that which retards or frustrates development, and injures some
part of the universe. It is akin to disease and ugliness and misery.


_Q. 6.  How does man know good from evil?_

_A._ His own nature, when uncorrupted by greed, is sufficiently in
harmony with the rest of the universe to enable him to be well aware in
general of what is a help or a hindrance to the guiding Spirit, of which
he himself is a real and effective portion.


_Q. 7.  How comes it that evil exists?_

_A._ Evil is not an absolute thing, but has reference to a standard of
attainment. The possibility of evil is the necessary consequence of a
rise in the scale of moral existence; just as an organism whose normal
temperature is far above “absolute zero” is necessarily liable to
damaging and deadly cold. But cold is not in itself a positive or
created thing.


_Q. 8.  What is sin?_

_A._ Sin is the deliberate and wilful act of a free agent who sees the
better and chooses the worse, and thereby acts injuriously to himself
and others. The root sin is selfishness, whereby needless trouble and
pain are inflicted on others; when fully developed it involves moral
suicide.


_Q. 9.  Are there beings lower in the scale of existence than man?_

_A._ Yes, multitudes. In every part of the earth where life is possible,
there we find it developed. Life exists in every variety of animal, in
earth and air and sea, and in every species of plant.


_Q. 10.  Are there any beings higher in the scale of existence than
man?_

_A._ Man is the highest of the dwellers on the planet earth, but the
earth is only one of many planets warmed by the sun, and the sun is only
one of a myriad of similar suns, which are so far off that we barely see
them and group them indiscriminately as “stars.” We may reasonably
conjecture that in some of the innumerable worlds circling round those
distant suns there must be beings far higher in the scale of existence
than ourselves; indeed, we have no knowledge which enables us to assert
the absence of intelligence anywhere.


_Q. 11.  What caused and what maintains existence?_

_A._ Of our own knowledge we are unable to realise the meaning of
origination or of maintenance; all that we ourselves can accomplish in
the physical world is to move things into desired positions, and leave
them to act on each other. Nevertheless our effective movements are
inspired by thought, and so we conceive that Intelligence is immanent in
all the processes of nature; for they are not random and purposeless,
but organised and beautiful.


_Q. 12.  What is to be said of man’s higher faculties?_

_A._ The faculties and achievements of the highest among mankind—in Art,
in Science, in Philosophy, and in Religion—are not explicable as an
outcome of a struggle for existence. Something more than mere life is
possessed by us—something represented by the words “mind” and “soul” and
“spirit.” On one side we are members of the animal kingdom; on another
we are associates in a loftier type of existence, and are linked with
the Divine.


_Q. 13.  Is man helped in his struggle upward?_

_A._ There is a Power in the Universe vastly beyond our comprehension;
and we trust and believe that it is a Good and Loving Power, able and
willing to help us and all creatures, and to guide us wisely, without
detriment to our incipient freedom. This Loving-kindness continually
surrounds us; in it we live and have our real being; it is the
mainspring of joy and love and beauty, and we call it the Grace of God.
It sustains and enriches all worlds, and may take a multiplicity of
forms, but it was specially manifested to dwellers on this planet in the
Life of Jesus Christ, through whose spirit and living influence the race
of man may hope to rise to heights at present inaccessible.


_Q. 14.  How may we become informed concerning things too high for our
own knowledge?_

_A._ We should strive to learn from the great teachers, the prophets and
poets and saints of the human race, and should seek to know and to
interpret their inspired writings.


_Q. 15.  What, then, do you reverently believe can be deduced from a
study of the records and traditions of the past in the light of the
present?_

_A._ I believe in one Infinite and Eternal Being, a guiding and loving
Father, in whom all things consist.

I believe that the Divine Nature is specially revealed to man through
Jesus Christ our Lord, who lived and taught and suffered in Palestine
1900 years ago, and has since been worshipped by the Christian Church as
the immortal Son of God, the Saviour of the world.

I believe that the Holy Spirit is ever ready to help us along the Way
towards Goodness and Truth; that prayer is a means of communion between
man and God; and that it is our privilege through faithful service to
enter into the Life Eternal, the Communion of Saints, and the Peace of
God.


_Q. 16.  What do you mean by the Life Eternal?_

_A._ I mean that whereas our terrestrial existence is temporary, our
real existence continues without ceasing, in either a higher or a lower
form, according to our use of opportunities and means of grace; and that
the fulness of Life ultimately attainable represents a growing
perfection at present inconceivable by us.


_Q. 17.  What is the significance of “the Communion of Saints”?_

_A._ Higher and holier beings must possess, in fuller fruition, those
privileges of communion which are already foreshadowed by our own
faculties of language, of sympathy, and of mutual aid; and as we know
that man’s power of friendly help is not confined to his fellows, but
extends to other animals, so may we conceive ourselves part of a mighty
Fellowship of love and service.


_Q. 18.  What do you understand by prayer?_

_A._ I understand that when our spirits are attuned to the Spirit of
Righteousness, our hopes and aspirations exert an influence far beyond
their conscious range, and in a true sense bring us into communion with
our Heavenly Father. This power of filial communion is called prayer; it
is an attitude of mingled worship and supplication; we offer petitions
in a spirit of trust and submission, and endeavour to realise the Divine
attributes, with the help and example of Christ.


_Q.  Rehearse the prayer taught us by Jesus._

_A._ Our Father, etc.

_Q. 19.  Explain the clauses of this prayer._

_A._ We first attune our spirit to consciousness of the Divine
Fatherhood; trying to realise His infinite holiness as well as His
loving-kindness, desiring that everything alien to His will should cease
in our hearts and in the world, and longing for the establishment of the
Kingdom of Heaven. Then we ask for the supply of the ordinary needs of
existence, and for the forgiveness of our sins and shortcomings as we
pardon those who have hurt us. We pray to be kept from evil influences,
and to be protected when they attack us. Finally, we repose in the
might, majesty, and dominion of the Eternal Goodness.


_Q. 20.  What is meant by the Kingdom of Heaven?_

_A._ The Kingdom of Heaven is the central feature of practical
Christianity. It represents a harmonious condition in which the Divine
Will is perfectly obeyed; it signifies the highest state of existence,
both individual and social, which we can conceive. Our whole effort
should, directly or indirectly, make ready its way,—in our hearts, in
our lives, and in the lives of others. It is the ideal state of society
towards which Reformers are striving; it is the ideal of conscious
existence towards which Saints aim.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                        _Printed by_
                        MORRISON & GIBB LIMITED
                        _Edinburgh_

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                       Works by Sir Oliver Lodge


 ELEMENTARY MECHANICS
      A text-book for Schools and Matriculation Candidates.
            (Chambers.)   4s. 6d.   Net price, 3s. 5d.

 MODERN VIEWS OF ELECTRICITY
      A well-known exposition of fundamental electrical principles.
            New Edition, 1907.        (Macmillan.) 6s.

 LIGHTNING CONDUCTORS AND LIGHTNING GUARDS
      A technical treatise on electric waves and discharges generally,
    for Architects, Electrical Engineers, and Physicists. 1892.
            (Whittaker & Co.) 15s. Net price, 11s. 3d.

 SIGNALLING THROUGH SPACE WITHOUT WIRES
      First published in 1894 under the title “The Work of Hertz
    and his Successors”; being a pioneer treatise on what has
    become Wireless Telegraphy.    (Electrician Co.) 5s. net.

 PIONEERS OF SCIENCE
      A course of popular lectures on Astronomical biography,
    being sketches of the lives of the famous Astronomers and
    their work, with numerous illustrations.
                     (Macmillan.) 6s. Net price, 4s. 6d.

 SCHOOL TEACHING AND SCHOOL REFORM
      A course of lectures delivered in Birmingham to Teachers.
        1905. (Williams & Norgate.) 3s. Net price, 2s. 3d.

 EASY MATHEMATICS; CHIEFLY ARITHMETIC
      Being a collection of hints to teachers, parents, self-taught
    students, and adults, and containing a summary or indication
    of most things in Elementary Mathematics useful to be  known.
        1905.  (Macmillan.)   4s. 6d.   Net price, 3s. 5d.

 LIFE AND MATTER
      A discussion of the scientific foundations of religion; being
    an answer to Haeckel, and a speculation concerning the
    meaning of Life. 1905. (Williams & Norgate.) 2s. 6d. net.

 MODERN VIEWS ON MATTER
      Being the Romanes Lecture to the University of Oxford,
    delivered in 1903, on the new discoveries in electricity in
    connection with Radium and other such phenomena. A
    pamphlet. (Clarendon Press.) (_Third Edition_) 1s. net.

 ELECTRONS, or the nature and properties of Negative Electricity.
      A treatise on the most recent discoveries in the pure science
    of Electricity. 1906. (George Bell & Sons.) 6s. net.

 THE SUBSTANCE OF FAITH ALLIED WITH SCIENCE
      A Catechism for Parents and Teachers. (Methuen & Co.)
        1907.                 2s. net.

                           MINOR PUBLICATIONS


 COMPETITION _VERSUS_ CO-OPERATION
      Fly-sheet of a Discourse delivered in Liverpool about 1890.
         (Fabian Soc.)      One Penny.

 MACEDONIA AND THE PROBLEM OF THE NEAR EAST
     (Published by Cornish Brothers, 1903)
       An Address at a Birmingham Town’s Meeting.   Sixpence.

 PUBLIC SERVICE VERSUS PRIVATE EXPENDITURE
      A pamphlet reporting an Address to the Order of Foresters,
    given in Birmingham Town Hall on Sunday, 9th October
      1904. (Printed by Fabian Soc.)      One Penny.

 SCIENCE AND RELIGION
      A shorthand report or a Discourse given to young men in the City
    Temple. 1905. (Christian Commonwealth Co.)     Threepence.

 SOME SOCIAL REFORMS.
      A Presidential Address to the Social and Political Education
    League, at Univ. Coll., London. May 1905. (Murby & Co.)
              Threepence.

 WORK AND LIFE. An Address to the Workers’ Educational Association.
    Sept. 1906. (H. Marshall & Son.)     One Penny.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                          A CATALOGUE OF BOOKS
                          PUBLISHED BY METHUEN
                          AND COMPANY: LONDON
                            36 ESSEX STREET
                                  W.C.

                                CONTENTS

                                                                    PAGE
 General Literature,                                               II-XX
   Ancient Cities,                                                    XX
   Antiquary’s Books,                                                 XX
   Arden Shakespeare,                                                 XX
   Beginner’s Books,                                                 XXI
   Business Books,                                                   XXI
   Byzantine Texts,                                                  XXI
   Churchman’s Bible,                                               XXII
   Churchman’s Library,                                             XXII
   Classical Translations,                                          XXII
   Classics of Art,                                                XXIII
   Commercial Series,                                              XXIII
   Connoisseur’s Library,                                          XXIII
   Library of Devotion,                                            XXIII
   Illustrated Pocket Library of Plain and Coloured Books,          XXIV
   Junior Examination Series,                                        XXV
   Junior School-Books,                                             XXVI
   Leaders of Religion,                                             XXVI
   Little Blue Books,                                               XXVI
   Little Books on Art,                                             XXVI
   Little Galleries,                                               XXVII
   Little Guides,                                                  XXVII
   Little Library,                                                 XXVII
   Little Quarto Shakespeare,                                       XXIX
   Miniature Library,                                               XXIX
   Oxford Biographies,                                              XXIX
   School Examination Series,                                       XXIX
   School Histories,                                                 XXX
   Textbooks of Science,                                             XXX
   Simplified French Texts,                                          XXX
   Standard Library,                                                 XXX
   Textbooks of Technology,                                         XXXI
   Handbooks of Theology,                                           XXXI
   Westminster Commentaries,                                       XXXII

 Fiction,                                                   XXXII-XXXVII
   The Shilling Novels,                                           XXXVII
   Books for Boys and Girls,                                       XXXIX
   Novels of Alexandre Dumas,                                      XXXIX
   Methuen’s Sixpenny Books,                                       XXXIX


                               MARCH 1907


------------------------------------------------------------------------

                             A CATALOGUE OF
                           MESSRS. METHUEN’S
                              PUBLICATIONS

      Colonial Editions are published of all Messrs. METHUEN’S
      Novels at a price above 2_s._ 6_d._, and similar editions
      are General Literature. These are marked in the Catalogue.
      Colonial editions are only for circulation in the British
      Colonies and India.

             I.P.L. represents Illustrated Pocket Library.

                      PART I.——GENERAL LITERATURE

=Abbot (Jacob).= See Little Blue Books.

=Abbott (J. H. M.).= Author of ‘Tommy Cornstalk.’ AN OUTLANDER IN
  ENGLAND: BEING SOME IMPRESSIONS OF AN AUSTRALIAN ABROAD. _Second
  Edition. Cr. 8vo._     6_s._

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

=Acatos (M. J.).= See Junior School Books.

=Adams (Frank).= JACK SPRATT. With 24 Coloured Pictures. _Super Royal
  16mo._   2_s._

=Adeney (W. F.)=, M.A. See Bennett and Adeney.

=Æschylus.= See Classical Translations.

=Æsop.= See I.P.L.

=Ainsworth (W. Harrison).= See I.P.L.

=Alderson (J. P.).= MR. ASQUITH. With Portraits and Illustrations. _Demy
  8vo._   7_s._ 6_d._ _net._

=Aldis (Janet).= MADAME GEOFFRIN, HER SALON, AND HER TIMES. With many
  Portraits and Illustrations. _Second Edition. Demy 8vo._     10_s._
  6_d._ _net._

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

=Alexander (William)=, D.D., Archbishop of Armagh. THOUGHTS AND COUNSELS
  OF MANY YEARS. _Demy 16mo._   2_s._ 6_d._

=Alken (Henry).= THE NATIONAL SPORTS OF GREAT BRITAIN. With descriptions
  in English and French. With 51 Coloured Plates. _Royal Folio. Five
  Guineas net._ The Plates can be had separately in a Portfolio.   £3,
  3_s._ _net_.

        See also I.P.L.

=Allen (C. C.)= See Textbooks of Technology.

=Allen (Jessie).= See Little Books on Art.

=Allen (J. Romilly)=, F.S.A. See Antiquary’s Books.

=Almack (E.).= See Little Books on Art.

=Amherst (Lady).= A SKETCH OF EGYPTIAN HISTORY FROM THE EARLIEST TIMES
  TO THE PRESENT DAY. With many Illustrations. _Demy 8vo._   7_s._ 6_d._
  _net._

=Anderson (F. M.).= THE STORY OF THE BRITISH EMPIRE FOR CHILDREN. With
  many Illustrations. _Cr. 8vo._   2_s._

=Anderson (J. G.)=, B.A., Examiner to London University, NOUVELLE
  GRAMMAIRE FRANÇAISE. _Cr. 8vo._   2_s._

EXERCICES DE GRAMMAIRE FRANÇAISE. _Cr. 8vo._   1_s._ 6_d._

=Andrewes (Bishop).= PRECES PRIVATAE. Edited, with Notes, by F. E.
  BRIGHTMAN, M.A., of Pusey House, Oxford. _Cr. 8vo._   6_s._

=Anglo-Australian.= AFTER-GLOW MEMORIES. _Cr. 8vo._   6_s._

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

=Aristotle.= THE NICOMACHEAN ETHICS. Edited, with an Introduction and
  Notes, by JOHN BURNET, M.A., Professor of Greek at St. Andrews.
  _Cheaper issue._ _Demy 8vo._   10_s._ 6_d._ _net._

=Ashton (R.).= See Little Blue Books.

=Atkins (H. G.).= See Oxford Biographies.

=Atkinson (C. M.).= JEREMY BENTHAM. _Demy 8vo._   5_s._ _net._

=Atkinson (T. D.).= A SHORT HISTORY OF ENGLISH ARCHITECTURE. With over
  200 Illustrations. _Second Edition. Fcap. 8vo._   3_s._ 6_d._ _net._

A GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN ENGLISH ARCHITECTURE. Illustrated. _Second
  Edition. Fcap. 8vo._   3_s._ 6_d._ _net._

=Auden (T.)=, M.A., F.S.A. See Ancient Cities.

=Aurelius (Marcus) and Epictetus.= WORDS OF THE ANCIENT WISE: Thoughts
  from. Edited by W. H. D. ROUSE, M.A., Litt.D. _Fcap. 8vo._   3_s._
  6_d._ _net._ See also Standard Library.

=Austen (Jane).= See Little Library and Standard Library.

=Bacon (Francis).= See Little Library and Standard Library.

=Baden-Powell (R. S. S.)=, Major-General. THE DOWNFALL OF PREMPEH. A
  Diary of Life in Ashanti, 1895. Illustrated. _Third Edition. Large Cr.
  8vo._   6_s._

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

THE MATABELE CAMPAIGN, 1896. With nearly 100 Illustrations. _Fourth
  Edition._ _Large Cr. 8vo._   6_s._

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

=Bailey (J. C.)=, M.A. See Cowper.

=Baker (W. G.)=, M.A. See Junior Examination Series.

=Baker (Julian L.)=, F.I.C., F.C.S. See Books on Business.

=Balfour (Graham).= THE LIFE OF ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON. _Second Edition.
  A Revised and Cheaper Edition._ _Crown 8vo._   6_s._

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

=Ballard (A.)=, B.A., LL.B. See Antiquary’s Books.

=Bally (S. E.).= See Commercial Series.

=Banks (Elizabeth L.).= THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF A ‘NEWSPAPER GIRL.’ _Second
  Edition._ _Cr. 8vo._   6_s._

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

=Barham (R. H.).= See Little Library.

=Baring (The Hon. Maurice).= WITH THE RUSSIANS IN MANCHURIA. _Third
  Edition._ _Demy 8vo._   7_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

=Baring-Gould (S.).= THE LIFE OF NAPOLEON BONAPARTE. With over 450
  Illustrations in the Text, and 12 Photogravure Plates. _Gilt top.
  Large quarto._   36_s._

THE TRAGEDY OF THE CÆSARS. With numerous Illustrations from Busts, Gems,
  Cameos, etc. _Sixth Edition._ _Royal 8vo._   10_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

A BOOK OF FAIRY TALES. With numerous Illustrations by A. J. GASKIN.
  _Third Edition._ _Cr. 8vo. Buckram._   6_s._

OLD ENGLISH FAIRY TALES. With numerous Illustrations by F. D. BEDFORD.
  _Third Edition._ _Cr. 8vo. Buckram._   6_s._

THE VICAR OF MORWENSTOW. Revised Edition. With a Portrait. _Third
  Edition._ _Cr. 8vo._   3_s._ 6_d._

A BOOK OF DARTMOOR: A Descriptive and Historical Sketch. With Plans and
  numerous Illustrations. _Second Edition._ _Cr. 8vo._   6_s._

A BOOK OF DEVON. Illustrated. _Second Edition._ _Cr. 8vo._   6_s._

A BOOK OF CORNWALL. Illustrated. _Second Edition._ _Cr. 8vo._   6_s._

A BOOK OF NORTH WALES. Illustrated. _Cr. 8vo._   6_s._

A BOOK OF SOUTH WALES. Illustrated. _Cr. 8vo._   6_s._

A BOOK OF BRITTANY. Illustrated. _Cr. 8vo._   6_s._

A BOOK OF THE RIVIERA. Illustrated. _Cr. 8vo._   6_s._

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

A BOOK OF THE RHINE: From Cleve to Mainz. Illustrated. Second Edition.
  _Crown 8vo._   6_s._

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

A BOOK OF THE PYRENEES. With 24 Illustrations. _Crown 8vo._   6_s._

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

A BOOK OF GHOSTS. With 8 Illustrations by D. MURRAY SMITH. _Second
  Edition._ _Cr. 8vo._   6_s._

OLD COUNTRY LIFE. With 67 Illustrations. _Fifth Edition._ _Large Cr.
  8vo._   6_s._

A GARLAND OF COUNTRY SONG: English Folk Songs with their Traditional
  Melodies. Collected and arranged by S. BARING-GOULD and H. F.
  SHEPPARD. _Demy 4to._   6_s._

SONGS OF THE WEST: Folk Songs of Devon and Cornwall. Collected from the
  Mouths of the People. By S. BARING-GOULD, M.A., and H. FLEETWOOD
  SHEPPARD, M.A. New and Revised Edition, under the musical editorship
  of CECIL J. SHARP, Principal of the Hampstead Conservatoire. _Large
  Imperial 8vo._   5_s._ _net_.

A BOOK OF NURSERY SONGS AND RHYMES. Edited by S. BARING-GOULD, and
  Illustrated by the Birmingham Art School. _A New Edition._ _Long Cr.
  8vo._   2_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

STRANGE SURVIVALS AND SUPERSTITIONS. _Third Edition._ _Cr. 8vo._   2_s._
  6_d._ _net_.

YORKSHIRE ODDITIES AND STRANGE EVENTS. _New and Revised Edition._ _Cr.
  8vo.   _ 2_s._ 6_d._ _net_.     See also Little Guides.

=Barker (Aldred F.).= See Textbooks of Technology.

=Barker (E.)=, M.A. (Late) Fellow of Merton College, Oxford. THE
  POLITICAL THOUGHT OF PLATO AND ARISTOTLE. _Demy 8vo._   10_s._ 6_d._
  _net_.

=Barnes (W. E.)=, D.D. See Churchman’s Bible.

=Barnett (Mrs. P. A.).= See Little Library.

=Baron (R. R. N.)=, M.A. FRENCH PROSE COMPOSITION. _Second Edition._
  _Cr. 8vo._   2_s._ 6_d._ _Key_, 3_s._ _net_.     See also Junior
  School Books.

=Barron (H. M.)=, M.A., Wadham College, Oxford. TEXTS FOR SERMONS. With
  a Preface by Canon SCOTT HOLLAND. _Cr. 8vo._   2_s._ 6_d._

=Bartholomew (J. G.)=, F.R.S.E. See C. G. Robertson.

=Bastable (C. F.)=, M.A. THE COMMERCE OF NATIONS. _Fourth Ed._ _Cr.
  8vo._   2_s._ 6_d._

=Bastian (H. Charlton)=, M.D., F.R.S. THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE.
  Illustrated. _Demy 8vo._   7_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Batson (Mrs. Stephen).= A CONCISE HANDBOOK OF GARDEN FLOWERS. _Fcap.
  8vo._   3_s._ 6_d._

=Batten (Loring W.)=, Ph.D., S.T.D. THE HEBREW PROPHET. _Cr. 8vo._
    3_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Bayley (R. Child).= THE COMPLETE PHOTOGRAPHER. With over 100
  Illustrations. _Demy 8vo._   10_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Beard (W. S.).= EASY EXERCISES IN ALGEBRA. _Cr. 8vo._   1_s._ 6_d._ See
  Junior Examination Series and Beginner’s Books.

=Beckford (Peter).= THOUGHTS ON HUNTING. Edited by J. OTHO PAGET, and
  Illustrated by G. H. JALLAND. _Second Edition._ _Demy 8vo._   6_s._

=Beckford (William).= See Little Library.

=Beeching (H. C.)=, M.A., Canon of Westminster. See Library of Devotion.

=Begbie (Harold).= MASTER WORKERS. Illustrated. _Demy 8vo._   7_s._
  6_d._ _net_.

=Behmen (Jacob).= DIALOGUES ON THE SUPERSENSUAL LIFE. Edited by BERNARD
  HOLLAND. _Fcap. 8vo._   3_s._ 6_d._

=Belloc (Hilaire)=, M.P. PARIS. _Second Edition._ With Maps and
  Illustrations. _Cr. 8vo._   6_s._

HILLS AND THE SEA. _Second Edition._ _Crown 8vo._   6_s._

=Bellot (H. H. L.)=, M.A. THE INNER AND MIDDLE TEMPLE. With numerous
  Illustrations. _Crown 8vo._   6_s._ _net_.

=Bennett (W. H.)=, M.A. A PRIMER OF THE BIBLE. _Third Edition._ _Cr.
  8vo._   2_s._ 6_d._

=Bennett (W. H.)= and _Adeney (W. F.)_. A BIBLICAL INTRODUCTION. _Fourth
  Edition._ _Cr. 8vo._   7_s._ 6_d._

=Benson (Archbishop).= GOD’S BOARD: Communion Addresses. _Fcap. 8vo._
    3_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Benson (A. C.)=, M.A. See Oxford Biographies.

=Benson (R. M.).= THE WAY OF HOLINESS: a Devotional Commentary on the
  119th Psalm. _Cr. 8vo._   5_s._

=Bernard (E. R.)=, M.A., Canon of Salisbury. THE ENGLISH SUNDAY. _Fcap.
  8vo._ 1_s._ 6_d._

=Bertouch (Baroness de).= THE LIFE OF FATHER IGNATIUS. Illustrated.
  _Demy 8vo._   10_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Beruete (A. de).= See Classics of Art.

=Betham-Edwards (M.).= HOME LIFE IN FRANCE. Illustrated. _Fourth and
  Cheaper Edition._ _Crown 8vo._   6_s._

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

=Bethune-Baker (J. F.)=, M.A. See Handbooks of Theology.

=Bidez (M.).= See Byzantine Texts.

=Biggs (C. R. D.)=, D.D. See Churchman’s Bible.

=Bindley (T. Herbert)=, B.D. THE OECUMENICAL DOCUMENTS OF THE FAITH.
  With Introductions and Notes. _Second Edition._ _Cr. 8vo._   6_s._
  _net_.

=Binns (H. B.).= THE LIFE OF WALT WHITMAN. Illustrated. _Demy 8vo._
    10_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

=Binyon (Lawrence).= THE DEATH OF ADAM; AND OTHER POEMS. _Cr. 8vo._
    3_s._ 6_d._ _net_.      See also W. Blake.

=Birnstingl (Ethel).= See Little Books on Art.

=Blackmantle (Bernard).= See I.P.L.

=Blair (Robert).= See I.P.L.

=Blake (William).= THE LETTERS OF WILLIAM BLAKE, TOGETHER WITH A LIFE BY
  FREDERICK TATHAM. Edited from the Original Manuscripts, with an
  Introduction and Notes, by ARCHIBALD G. B. RUSSELL. With 12
  Illustrations. _Demy 8vo._   7_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE BOOK OF JOB. With a General Introduction by
  LAWRENCE BINYON. _Quarto._   21_s._ _net_.      See also I.P.L. and
  Little Library.

=Blaxland (B.)=, M.A. See Library of Devotion.

=Bloom (J. Harvey)=, M.A. SHAKESPEARE’S GARDEN. Illustrated. _Fcap.
  8vo._   3_s._ 6_d._; _leather_, 4_s._ 6_d._ _net_.      See also
  Antiquary’s Books.

=Blouet (Henri).= See Beginner’s Books.

=Boardman (T. H.)=, M.A. See Textbooks of Science.

=Bodley (J. E. C.)=, Author of ‘France.’ THE CORONATION OF EDWARD VII.
  _Demy 8vo._   21_s._ _net_. By Command of the King.

=Body (George)=, D.D. THE SOUL’S PILGRIMAGE: Devotional Readings from
  his writings. Selected by J. H. BURN, B.D., F.R.S.E. _Pott 8vo._
    2_s._ 6_d._

=Bona (Cardinal).= See Library of Devotion.

=Boon (F. C.).= See Commercial Series.

=Borrow (George).= See Little Library.

=Bos (J. Ritzema).= AGRICULTURAL ZOOLOGY. Translated by J. R. AINSWORTH
  DAVIS, M.A. With 155 Illustrations. _Cr. 8vo._ _Third Edition_.
    3_s._ 6_d._

=Botting (C. G.)=, B.A. EASY GREEK EXERCISES. _Cr. 8vo._   2_s._ See
  also Junior Examination Series.

=Boulting (W.).= TASSO AND HIS TIMES. With 24 Illustrations. _Demy 8vo._
    10_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Boulton (E. S.)=, M.A. GEOMETRY ON MODERN LINES. _Cr. 8vo._   2_s._

=Boulton (William B.).= THOMAS GAINSBOROUGH. With 40 Illustrations.
  _Second Ed._ _Demy 8vo._   7_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS, P.R.A. With 49 Illustrations. _Demy 8vo._   7_s._
  6_d._ _net_.

=Bowden (E. M.).= THE IMITATION OF BUDDHA: Being Quotations from
  Buddhist Literature for each Day in the Year. _Fifth Edition._ _Cr.
  16mo._   2_s._ 6_d._

=Boyd-Carpenter (Margaret).= THE CHILD IN ART. Illustrated. _Second
  Edition._ _Large Crown 8vo._   6_s._

=Boyle (W.).= CHRISTMAS AT THE ZOO. With Verses by W. BOYLE and 24
  Coloured Pictures by H. B. NEILSON. _Super Royal 16mo._   2_s._

=Brabant (F. G.)=, M.A. See Little Guides.

=Bradley (A. G.).= ROUND ABOUT WILTSHIRE. With 30 Illustrations of which
  14 are in colour by T.C. GOTCH. _Cr. 8vo._   6_s._

=Bradley (J. W.).= See Little Books on Art.

=Braid (James) and Others.= GREAT GOLFERS IN THE MAKING. By Thirty-Four
  Champions. Edited, with an Introduction, by HENRY LEACH. With 34
  Portraits. _Demy 8vo._   7_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

=Brailsford (H. N.).= MACEDONIA: ITS RACES AND ITS FUTURE. Illustrated.
  _Demy 8vo._   12_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Brodrick (Mary)= and =Morton (Anderson)=. A CONCISE HANDBOOK OF
  EGYPTIAN ARCHÆOLOGY. Illustrated. _Cr. 8vo._   3_s._ 6_d._

=Brooks (E. E.)=, B.Sc. See Textbooks of Technology.

=Brooks (E. W.).= See Byzantine Texts.

=Brown (P. H.)=, LL.D., Fraser Professor of Ancient (Scottish) History
  at the University of Edinburgh. SCOTLAND IN THE TIME OF QUEEN MARY.
  _Demy 8vo._ 7_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Brown (S. E.)=, M.A., Camb., B.A., B.Sc., London; Senior Science Master
  at Uppingham School. A PRACTICAL CHEMISTRY NOTE-BOOK FOR MATRICULATION
  AND ARMY CANDIDATES. EASIER EXPERIMENTS ON THE COMMONER SUBSTANCES.
  _Cr. 4to._   1_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Browne (Sir Thomas).= See Standard Library.

=Brownell (C. L.).= THE HEART OF JAPAN. Illustrated. _Third Edition._
  _Cr. 8vo._   6_s._; _also Demy 8vo._   6_d._

=Browning (Robert).= See Little Library.

=Buckland (Francis T.).= CURIOSITIES OF NATURAL HISTORY. Illustrated by
  H. B. NEILSON. _Cr. 8vo._   3_s._ 6_d._

=Buckton (A. M.)= THE BURDEN OF ENGELA: a Ballad-Epic. _Second Edition._
  _Cr. 8vo._   3_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

KINGS IN BABYLON. A Drama. _Crown 8vo._   1_s._ _net_.

EAGER HEART: A Mystery Play. _Fifth Edition._ _Cr. 8vo._   1_s._ _net_.

=Budge (E. A. Wallis).= THE GODS OF THE EGYPTIANS. With over 100
  Coloured Plates and many Illustrations. _Two Volumes._ _Royal 8vo._
    £3, 3_s._ _net_.

=Buisson (J. C. Du)=, D.D. See Churchman’s Bible.

=Buist (H. Massac).= THE MOTOR YEAR BOOK AND AUTOMOBILISTS’ ANNUAL FOR
  1906. _Demy 8vo._   7_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Bull (Paul)=, Army Chaplain. GOD AND OUR SOLDIERS. _Second Edition._
  _Cr. 8vo._   6_s._

=Bulley (Miss).= See Lady Dilke.

=Bunyan (John).= THE PILGRIM’S PROGRESS. Edited, with an Introduction,
  by C. H. FIRTH, M.A. With 39 Illustrations by R. ANNING BELL. _Cr.
  8vo._   6_s._     See also  Library of Devotion and Standard Library.

=Burch (G. J.)=, M.A., F.R.S. A MANUAL OF ELECTRICAL SCIENCE.
  Illustrated. _Cr. 8vo._   3_s._

=Burgess (Gelett).= GOOPS AND HOW TO BE THEM. Illustrated. _Small 4to._
    6_s._

=Burke (Edmund).= See Standard Library.

=Burn (A. E.)=, D.D., Rector of Handsworth and Prebendary of Lichfield.
      See Handbooks of Theology.

=Burn (J. H.)=, B.D. THE CHURCHMAN’S TREASURY OF SONG. Selected and
  Edited by. _Fcap 8vo._   3_s._ 6_d._ _net_. See also Library of
  Devotion.

=Burnand (Sir F. C.).= RECORDS AND REMINISCENCES. With a Portrait by H.
  V. HERKOMER. _Cr. 8vo._ _Fourth and Cheaper Edition._ 6_s._

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

=Burns (Robert)=, THE POEMS OF. Edited by ANDREW LANG and W. A. CRAIGIE.
  With Portrait. _Third Edition._ _Demy 8vo, gilt top._ 6_s._

=Burnside (W. F.)=, M.A. OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY FOR USE IN SCHOOLS.
  _Second Edition._ _Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._

=Burton (Alfred).= See I.P.L.

=Bussell (F. W.)=, D.D., Fellow and Vice-Principal of Brasenose College,
  Oxford. CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY AND SOCIAL PROGRESS: The Bampton Lectures
  for 1905. _Demy 8vo._   10_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Butler (Joseph).= See Standard Library.

=Caldecott (Alfred)=, D.D. See Handbooks of Theology.

=Calderwood (D. S.)=, Headmaster of the Normal School, Edinburgh. TEST
  CARDS IN EUCLID AND ALGEBRA. In three packets of 40, with Answers.
   1_s._ each. Or in three Books, price 2_d._, 2_d._, and 3_d._

=Cambridge (Ada) [Mrs. Cross].= THIRTY YEARS IN AUSTRALIA. _Demy 8vo._
    7_s._ 6_d._

=Canning (George).= See Little Library.

=Capey (E. F. H.).= See Oxford Biographies.

=Careless (John).= See I.P.L.

=Carlyle (Thomas).= THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. Edited by C. R. L. FLETCHER,
  Fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford. _Three Volumes._ _Cr. 8vo._
    18_s._

THE LIFE AND LETTERS OF OLIVER CROMWELL. With an Introduction by C. H.
  FIRTH, M.A., and Notes and Appendices by Mrs. S. C. LOMAS. _Three
  Volumes._ _Demy 8vo._   18_s._ _net_.

=Carlyle (R. M. and A. J.)=, M.A. See Leaders of Religion.

=Channer (C. C.) and Roberts (M. E.).= LACEMAKING IN THE MIDLANDS, PAST
  AND PRESENT. With 16 full-page Illustrations. _Cr. 8vo._   2_s._ 6_d._

=Chapman (S. J.).= See Books on Business.

=Chatterton (Thomas).= See Standard Library.

=Chesterfield (Lord)=, THE LETTERS OF, TO HIS SON. Edited, with an
  Introduction by C. STRACHEY, and Notes by A. CALTHROP. _Two Volumes._
  _Cr. 8vo._   12_s._

=Chesterton (G.K.).= CHARLES DICKENS. With two Portraits in
  photogravure. _Fourth Edition._ _Demy 8vo._   7_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

=Childe (Charles P.)=, B.A., F.R.C.S. THE CONTROL OF A SCOURGE: OR, HOW
  CANCER IS CURABLE. _Demy 8vo._ 7_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Christian (F. W.).= THE CAROLINE ISLANDS. With many Illustrations and
  Maps. _Demy 8vo._   12_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Cicero.= See Classical Translations.

=Clarke (F. A.)=, M.A. See Leaders of Religion.

=Clausen (George)=, A.R.A., R.W.S. AIMS AND IDEALS IN ART: Eight
  Lectures delivered to the Students of the Royal Academy of Arts. With
  32 Illustrations. _Second Edition. Large Post 8vo._   5_s._ _net_.

SIX LECTURES ON PAINTING. _First Series._ With 19 Illustrations. _Third
  Edition, Large Post 8vo._   3_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Cleather (A. L.).= See Wagner.

=Clinch (G.).= See Little Guides.

=Clough (W. T.).= See Junior School Books and Textbooks of Science.

=Clouston (T. S.)=, M.D., F.R.S.E., Lecturer on Mental Diseases in the
  University of Edinburgh. THE HYGIENE OF MIND. With 10 Illustrations.
  _Third Edition. Demy 8vo._   7_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Coast (W. G.)=, B.A. EXAMINATION PAPERS IN VERGIL. _Cr. 8vo._   2_s._

=Cobb (T.).= See Little Blue Books.

=Cobb (W. F.)=, M.A. THE BOOK OF PSALMS: with a Commentary. _Demy 8vo._
    10_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Coleridge (S. T.).= POEMS OF. Selected and Arranged by ARTHUR SYMONS.
  With a photogravure Frontispiece. _Fcap. 8vo._   2_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Collingwood (W. G.)=, M.A. THE LIFE OF JOHN RUSKIN. With Portraits.
  _Sixth Edition. Cr. 8vo._   2_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Collins (W. E.)=, M.A. See Churchman’s Library.

=Colonna.= HYPNEROTOMACHIA POLIPHILI UBI HUMANA OMNIA NON NISI SOMNIUM
  ESSE DOCET ATQUE OBITER PLURIMA SCITU SANE QUAM DIGNA COMMEMORAT. An
  edition limited to 350 copies on handmade paper. _Folio._   £3, 3_s._
  _net_.

=Combe (William).= See I.P.L.

=Conrad (Joseph).= THE MIRROR OF THE SEA: Memories and Impressions.
  _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._   6_s._

=Cook (A. M.)=, M.A., and =Marchant (C. E.)=, M.A. PASSAGES FOR UNSEEN
  TRANSLATION. Selected from Greek and Latin Literature. _Third Edition.
  Cr. 8vo._   3_s._ 6_d._

LATIN PASSAGES FOR UNSEEN TRANSLATION. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._   1_s._
  6_d._

=Cooke-Taylor (R. W.).= THE FACTORY SYSTEM. _Cr. 8vo._   2_s._ 6_d._

=Corelli (Marie).= THE PASSING OF THE GREAT QUEEN. _Second Ed. Fcap.
  4to._   1_s._

A CHRISTMAS GREETING. _Cr. 4to._   1_s._

=Corkran (Alice).= See Little Books on Art.

=Cotes (Everard).= SIGNS AND PORTENTS IN THE FAR EAST. With 24
  Illustrations. _Demy 8vo._   7_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Cotes (Rosemary).= DANTE’S GARDEN. With a Frontispiece. _Second
  Edition. Fcap. 8vo._   2_s._ 6_d._; _leather_, 3_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

BIBLE FLOWERS. With a Frontispiece and Plan. _Fcap. 8vo._   2_s._ 6_d._
  _net_.

=Cowley (Abraham).= See Little Library.

=Cowper (William)=, THE POEMS OF. Edited with an Introduction and Notes
  by J. C. BAILEY, M.A. Illustrated, including two unpublished designs
  by WILLIAM BLAKE. _Demy 8vo._   10_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Cox (J. Charles)=, LL.D., F.S.A. See Little Guides, The Antiquary’s
  Books, and Ancient Cities.

=Cox (Harold)=, B.A., M.P. LAND NATIONALISATION AND LAND TAXATION.
  _Second Edition revised. Cr. 8vo._   3_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Crabbe (George).= See Little Library.

=Craigie (W. A.).= A PRIMER OF BURNS. _Cr. 8vo._   2_s._ 6_d._

=Craik (Mrs.).= See Little Library.

=Crane (Capt. C. P.).= See Little Guides.

=Crashaw (Richard).= See Little Library.

=Crawford (F. G.).= See Mary C. Danson.

=Crofts (T. R. N.)=, M.A. See Simplified French Texts.

=Cross (J. A.)=, M.A. THE FAITH OF THE BIBLE. _Fcap. 8vo._   2_s._ 6_d._
  _net_.

=Cruikshank (G.).= THE LOVING BALLAD OF LORD BATEMAN. With 11 Plates.
  _Cr. 16mo._   1_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Cunliffe (Sir F. H. E.)=, Fellow of All Souls’ College, Oxford. THE
  HISTORY OF THE BOER WAR. With many Illustrations, Plans, and
  Portraits. _In 2 vols. Quarto._   15_s._ _each_.

=Crump (B.).= See Wagner.

=Cunynghame (H.)=, C.B., See Connoisseur’s Library.

=Cutts (E. L.)=, D.D. See Leaders of Religion.

=Daniell (G. W.)=, M.A. See Leaders of Religion.

=Danson (Mary C.) and Crawford (F. G.).= FATHERS IN THE FAITH. _Fcap.
  8vo._   1_s._ 6_d._

=Dante.= LA COMMEDIA DI DANTE. The Italian Text edited by PAGET TOYNBEE,
  M.A., D.Litt. _Cr. 8vo._   6_s._

THE PURGATORIO OF DANTE. Translated into Spenserian Prose by C. GORDON
  WRIGHT. With the Italian text. _Fcap. 8vo._   2_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

      See also Paget Toynbee, Little Library, Standard Library, and
  Warren-Vernon.

=Darley (George).= See Little Library.

=D’Arcy (R. F.)=, M.A. A NEW TRIGONOMETRY FOR BEGINNERS. With numerous
  diagrams. _Cr. 8vo._   2_s._ 6_d._

=Davenport (Cyril).= See Connoisseur’s Library and Little Books on Art.

=Davey (Richard).= THE PAGEANT OF LONDON. With 40 Illustrations in
  Colour by JOHN FULLEYLOVE, R.I. _In Two Volumes. Demy 8vo._   15_s._
  _net_.

=Davis (H. W. C.)=, M.A., Fellow and Tutor of Balliol College, Author of
  ‘Charlemagne.’ ENGLAND UNDER THE NORMANS AND ANGEVINS: 1066-1272. With
  Maps and Illustrations. _Demy 8vo._   10_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Dawson (Nelson).= See Connoisseur’s Library.

=Dawson (Mrs. N.).= See Little Books on Art.

=Deane (A. C.).= See Little Library.

=Dearmer (Mabel).= A CHILD’S LIFE OF CHRIST. With 8 Illustrations in
  Colour by E. FORTESCUE-BRICKDALE. _Large Cr. 8vo._   6_s._

=Delbos (Leon).= THE METRIC SYSTEM. _Cr. 8vo._   2_s._

=Demosthenes.= AGAINST CONON AND CALLICLES. Edited by F. DARWIN SWIFT,
  M.A. _Third Edition. Fcap. 8vo._   2_s._

=Dickens (Charles).= See Little Library, I.P.L., and Chesterton.

=Dickinson (Emily).= POEMS. _Cr. 8vo._   4_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Dickinson (G. L.)=, M.A., Fellow of King’s College, Cambridge. THE
  GREEK VIEW OF LIFE. _Fifth Edition. Cr. 8vo._   2_s._ 6_d._

=Dickson (H. N.).= F.R.Met. Soc. METEOROLOGY. Illustrated. _Cr. 8vo._
    2_s._ 6_d._

=Dilke (Lady)=, =Bulley (Miss)=, and =Whitley (Miss)=. WOMEN’S WORK.
  _Cr. 8vo._   2_s._ 6_d._

=Dillon (Edward).= See Connoisseur’s Library and Little Books on Art.

=Ditchfield (P. H.)=, M.A., F.S.A. THE STORY OF OUR ENGLISH TOWNS. With
  an Introduction by AUGUSTUS JESSOPP, D.D. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._
    6_s._

OLD ENGLISH CUSTOMS: Extant at the Present Time. _Cr. 8vo._   6_s._

 ENGLISH VILLAGES. Illustrated. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._   2_s._ 6_d._
  _net_.

THE OLD PARISH CLERK. With 30 Illustrations. _Demy 8vo._   7_s._ 6_d._
  _net_.

=Dixon (W. M.)=, M.A. A PRIMER OF TENNYSON. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._
    2_s._ 6_d._

ENGLISH POETRY FROM BLAKE TO BROWNING. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._
    2_s._ 6_d._

=Doney (May).= SONGS OF THE REAL. _Cr. 8vo._   3_s._ 6_d._ _net_.     A
  volume of poems.

=Douglas (James).= THE MAN IN THE PULPIT. _Cr. 8vo._   2_s._ 6_d._
  _net_.

=Dowden (J.)=, D.D., Lord Bishop of Edinburgh. See Churchman’s Library.

=Drage (G.).= See Books on Business.

=Driver (S. R.)=, D.D., D.C.L., Canon of Christ Church, Regius Professor
  of Hebrew in the University of Oxford. SERMONS ON SUBJECTS CONNECTED
  WITH THE OLD TESTAMENT. _Cr. 8vo._   6_s._     See also Westminster
  Commentaries.

=Dry (Wakeling).= See Little Guides.

=Dryhurst (A. R.).= See Little Books on Art.

=Duguid (Charles).= See Books on Business.

=Dumas (Alexander).= MY MEMOIRS. Translated by E. M. WALLER. With
  Portraits. _In Six Volumes. Cr. 8vo._   6_s._ _each_. Volume I.

=Dunn (J. T.)=, D.Sc., =and Mundella (V. A.)=. GENERAL ELEMENTARY
  SCIENCE. With 114 Illustrations. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._   3_s._
  6_d._

=Dunstan (A. E.)=, B.Sc. See Junior School Books and Textbooks of
  Science.

=Durham (The Earl of).= A REPORT ON CANADA. With an Introductory Note.
  _Demy 8vo._   4_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Dutt (W. A.).= THE NORFOLK BROADS. With coloured Illustrations by FRANK
  SOUTHGATE. _Cr. 8vo._   6_s._

WILD LIFE IN EAST ANGLIA. With 16 Illustrations in colour by FRANK
  SOUTHGATE, R.B.A. _Second Edition. Demy 8vo._   7_s._ 6_d._ _net_.
      See also Little Guides.

=Earle (John)=, Bishop of Salisbury. MICROCOSMOGRAPHIE, OR A PIECE OF
  THE WORLD DISCOVERED. _Post 16mo._   2_s._ _net_.

=Edmonds (Major J. E.).= See W. B. Wood.

=Edwards (Clement)=, M.P. RAILWAY NATIONALIZATION. _Second Edition
  Revised. Crown 8vo._   2_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Edwards (W. Douglas).= See Commercial Series.

=Egan (Pierce).= See I.P.L.

=Egerton (H. E.)=, M.A. A HISTORY OF BRITISH COLONIAL POLICY. New and
  Cheaper Issue. _Demy 8vo._   7_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

=Ellaby (C. G.).= See Little Guides.

=Ellerton (F. G.).= See S. J. Stone.

=Ellwood (Thomas)=, THE HISTORY OF THE LIFE OF. Edited by C. G. CRUMP,
  M.A. _Cr. 8vo._   6_s._

=Epictetus.= See Aurelius.

=Erasmus.= A Book called in Latin ENCHIRIDION MILITIS CHRISTIANI,
  and in English the Manual of the Christian Knight.
      From the edition printed by Wynken de Worde, 1533. _Fcap.
  8vo._   3_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Fairbrother (W. H.)=, M.A. THE PHILOSOPHY OF T. H. GREEN. _Second
  Edition. Cr. 8vo._   3_s._ 6_d._

=Farrer (Reginald).= THE GARDEN OF ASIA. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._
    6_s._

=Fea (Allan).= SOME BEAUTIES OF THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY. With 82
  Illustrations. _Second Edition. Demy 8vo._   12_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

FELISSA; OR, THE LIFE AND OPINIONS OF A KITTEN OF SENTIMENT. With 12
  Coloured Plates. _Post 16mo._   2_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Ferrier (Susan).= See Little Library.

=Fidler (T. Claxton)=, M.Inst. C.E. See Books on Business.

=Fielding (Henry).= See Standard Library.

=Finn (S. W.)=, M.A. See Junior Examination Series.

=Firth (J. B.).= See Little Guides.

=Firth (C. H.)=, M.A. CROMWELL’S ARMY: A History of the English Soldier
  during the Civil Wars, the Commonwealth, and the Protectorate. _Cr.
  8vo._   6_s._

=Fisher (G. W.)=, M.A. ANNALS OF SHREWSBURY SCHOOL. Illustrated. _Demy
  8vo._   10_s._ 6_d._

=FitzGerald (Edward).= THE RUBÁIYÁT OF OMAR KHAYYÁM. Printed from the
  Fifth and last Edition. With a Commentary by Mrs. STEPHEN BATSON, and
  a Biography of Omar by E. D. ROSS. _Cr. 8vo._   6_s._ See also
  Miniature Library.

=FitzGerald (H. P.).= A CONCISE HANDBOOK OF CLIMBERS, TWINERS, AND WALL
  SHRUBS. Illustrated. _Fcap. 8vo._   3_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Fitzpatrick (S. A. O.).= See Ancient Cities.

=Flecker (W. H.)=, M.A., D.C.L., Headmaster of the Dean Close School,
  Cheltenham. THE STUDENT’S PRAYER BOOK. THE TEXT OF MORNING AND EVENING
  PRAYER AND LITANY. With an Introduction and Notes. _Cr. 8vo._   2_s._
  6_d._

=Flux (A. W.)=, M.A., William Dow Professor of Political Economy in
  M’Gill University, Montreal. ECONOMIC PRINCIPLES. _Demy 8vo._   7_s._
  6_d._ _net_.

=Fortescue (Mrs. G.).= See Little Books on Art.

=Fraser (David).= A MODERN CAMPAIGN; OR, WAR AND WIRELESS TELEGRAPHY IN
  THE FAR EAST. Illustrated. _Cr. 8vo._6_s._

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

=Fraser (J. F.).= ROUND THE WORLD ON A WHEEL. With 100 Illustrations.
  _Fourth Edition._ _Cr. 8vo._   6_s._

=French (W.)=, M.A. See Textbooks of Science.

=Freudenreich (Ed. von).= DAIRY BACTERIOLOGY. A Short Manual for the Use
  of Students. Translated by J. R. AINSWORTH DAVIS, M.A. _Second
  Edition. Revised._ _Cr. 8vo._   2_s._ 6_d._

=Fulford (H. W.)=, M.A. See Churchman’s Bible.

=Gallaher (D.) and Stead (D. W.).= THE COMPLETE RUGBY FOOTBALLER, ON THE
  NEW ZEALAND SYSTEM. With an Account of the Tour of the New Zealanders
  in England. With 35 Illustrations. _Second Edition._ _Demy 8vo._
    10_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Gallichan (W. M.).= See Little Guides.

=Gambado (Geoffrey. Esq.).= See I.P.L.

=Gaskell (Mrs.).= See Little Library and Standard Library.

=Gasquet=, the Right Rev. Abbot, O.S.B. See Antiquary’s Books.

=George (H. B.)=, M.A., Fellow of New College, Oxford. BATTLES OF
  ENGLISH HISTORY. With numerous Plans. _Fourth Edition._ Revised, with
  a new Chapter including the South African War. _Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._

A HISTORICAL GEOGRAPHY OF THE BRITISH EMPIRE. _Second Edition._ _Cr.
  8vo._   3_s._ 6_d._

=Gibbins (H. de B.)=, Litt.D., M.A. INDUSTRY IN ENGLAND: HISTORICAL
  OUTLINES. With 5 Maps. _Fourth Edition._ _Demy 8vo._   10_s._ 6_d._

THE INDUSTRIAL HISTORY OF ENGLAND. _Twelfth Edition._ Revised. With Maps
  and Plans. _Cr. 8vo._   3_s._

ENGLISH SOCIAL REFORMERS. _Second Edition._ _Cr. 8vo._   2_s._ 6_d._
      See also Commercial Series and R. A. Hadfield.

=Gibbon (Edward).= THE DECLINE AND FALL OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. Edited with
  Notes, Appendices, and Maps, by J. B. BURY, M.A., Litt.D., Regius
  Professor of Greek at Cambridge. _In Seven Volumes._ _Demy 8vo._ _Gilt
  top_,   8_s._ 6_d._ _each_. Also, Cr. 8vo. 6s. each.

MEMOIRS OF MY LIFE AND WRITINGS. Edited by G. BIRKBECK HILL, LL.D. _Cr.
  8vo._   6_s._     See also Standard Library.

=Gibson (E. C. S.)=, D.D., Lord Bishop of Gloucester. See Westminster
  Commentaries, Handbooks of Theology, and Oxford Biographies.

=Gilbert (A. R.).= See Little Books on Art.

=Gloag (M. R.)= and =Wyatt (Kate M.)=. A BOOK OF ENGLISH GARDENS. With
  24 Illustrations in Colour. _Demy 8vo._   10_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Godfrey (Elizabeth).= A BOOK OF REMEMBRANCE. Edited by. _Fcap. 8vo._
  2_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Godley (A. D.)=, M.A., Fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford. LYRA
  FRIVOLA. _Third Edition._ _Fcap. 8vo._   2_s._ 6_d._

VERSES TO ORDER. _Second Edition._ _Fcap. 8vo._   2_s._ 6_d._

SECOND STRINGS. _Fcap. 8vo._   2_s._ 6_d._

=Goldsmith (Oliver).= THE VICAR OF WAKEFIELD. _Fcap. 32mo._ With 10
  Plates in Photogravure by Tony Johannot. _Leather_, 2_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

        See also I.P.L. and Standard Library.

=Goodrich-Freer (A.).= IN A SYRIAN SADDLE. _Demy 8vo._   7_s._ 6_d._
  _net_.

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

=Gorst (Rt. Hon. Sir John).= THE CHILDREN OF THE NATION. _Second
  Edition._ _Demy 8vo._   7_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Goudge (H. L.)=, M.A., Principal of Wells Theological College. See
  Westminster Commentaries.

=Graham (P. Anderson).= THE RURAL EXODUS. _Cr. 8vo._   2_s._ 6_d._

=Granger (F. S.)=, M.A., Litt.D. PSYCHOLOGY. _Third Edition._ _Cr. 8vo._
    2_s._ 6_d._

THE SOUL OF A CHRISTIAN. _Cr. 8vo._   6_s._

=Gray (E. M’Queen).= GERMAN PASSAGES FOR UNSEEN TRANSLATION. _Cr. 8vo._
    2_s._ 6_d._

=Gray (P. L.)=, B.Sc. THE PRINCIPLES OF MAGNETISM AND ELECTRICITY: an
  Elementary Text-Book. With 181 Diagrams. _Cr. 8vo._   3_s._ 6_d._

=Green (G. Buckland)=, M.A., late Fellow of St. John’s College, Oxon.
  NOTES ON GREEK AND LATIN SYNTAX. _Cr. 8vo._   3_s._ 6_d._

=Green (E. T.)=, M.A. See Churchman’s Library.

=Greenidge (A. H. J.)=, M.A. A HISTORY OF ROME: From 133-104 B.C. _Demy
  8vo._   10_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Greenwell (Dora).= See Miniature Library.

=Gregory (R. A.).= THE VAULT OF HEAVEN. A Popular Introduction to
  Astronomy. Illustrated. _Cr. 8vo._   2_s._ 6_d._

=Gregory (Miss E. C.).= See Library of Devotion.

=Grubb (H. C.).= See Textbooks of Technology.

=Guiney (Louisa I.).= HURRELL FROUDE: Memoranda and Comments.
  Illustrated. _Demy 8vo._   10_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Gwynn (M. L.).= A BIRTHDAY BOOK. New and cheaper issue. _Royal 8vo._
    5_s._ _net_.

=Hackett (John)=, B.D. A HISTORY OF THE ORTHODOX CHURCH OF CYPRUS. With
  Maps and Illustrations. _Demy 8vo._   15_s._ _net_.

=Haddon (A. C.)=, Sc.D., F.R.S. HEAD-HUNTERS BLACK, WHITE, AND BROWN.
  With many Illustrations and a Map. _Demy 8vo._   15_s._

=Hadfield (R. A.)= and =Gibbins (H. de B.)=. A SHORTER WORKING DAY. _Cr.
  8vo._   2_s._ 6_d._

=Hall (R. N.) and Neal (W. G.).= THE ANCIENT RUINS OF RHODESIA.
  Illustrated. _Second Edition, revised. Demy 8vo._   10_s._ 6_d._
  _net_.

=Hall (R. N.).= GREAT ZIMBABWE. With numerous Plans and Illustrations.
  _Second Edition. Royal 8vo._   10_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Hamilton (F. J.)=, D.D. See Byzantine Texts.

=Hammond (J. L.).= CHARLES JAMES FOX. _Demy 8vo._   10_s._ 6_d._

=Hannay (D.).= A SHORT HISTORY OF THE ROYAL NAVY, Illustrated. _Two
  Volumes. Demy 8vo._   7_s._ 6_d._ _each_. Vol. I. 1200-1688.

=Hannay (James O.)=, M.A. THE SPIRIT AND ORIGIN OF CHRISTIAN
  MONASTICISM. _Cr. 8vo._   6_s._

  THE WISDOM OF THE DESERT. _Fcap. 8vo._   3_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Hardie (Martin).= See Connoisseur’s Library.

=Hare (A. T.)=, M.A. THE CONSTRUCTION OF LARGE INDUCTION COILS. With
  numerous Diagrams. _Demy 8vo._   6_s._

=Harrison (Clifford).= READING AND READERS. _Fcap. 8vo._   2_s._ 6_d._

=Harvey (Alfred)=, M.B. See Ancient Cities.

=Hawthorne (Nathaniel).= See Little Library.

  HEALTH, WEALTH AND WISDOM. _Cr. 8vo._   1_s._ _net_.

=Heath (Frank R.).= See Little Guides.

=Heath (Dudley).= See Connoisseur’s Library.

=Hello (Ernest).= STUDIES IN SAINTSHIP. Translated from the French by V.
  M. CRAWFORD. _Fcap. 8vo._   3_s._ 6_d._

=Henderson (B. W.)=, Fellow of Exeter College, Oxford. THE LIFE AND
  PRINCIPATE OF THE EMPEROR NERO. Illustrated. _New and cheaper issue.
  Demy 8vo._   7_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

AT INTERVALS. _Fcap. 8vo._   2_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Henderson (T. F.).= See Little Library and Oxford Biographies.

=Henley (W. E.).= ENGLISH LYRICS. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._   2_s._
  6_d._ _net_.

=Henley (W. E.)= and =Whibley (C.)=. A BOOK OF ENGLISH PROSE. _Cr. 8vo._
    2_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Henson (H. H.)=, B.D., Canon of Westminster. APOSTOLIC CHRISTIANITY: As
  Illustrated by the Epistles of St. Paul to the Corinthians. _Cr. 8vo._
    6_s._

LIGHT AND LEAVEN: HISTORICAL AND SOCIAL SERMONS. _Cr. 8vo._   6_s._

=Herbert (George).= See Library of Devotion.

=Herbert of Cherbury (Lord).= See Miniature Library.

=Hewins (W. A. S.)=, B.A. ENGLISH TRADE AND FINANCE IN THE SEVENTEENTH
  CENTURY. _Cr. 8vo._   2_s._ 6_d._

=Hewitt (Ethel M.).= A GOLDEN DIAL. A Day Book of Prose and Verse.
  _Fcap. 8vo._   2_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Heywood (W.).= PALIO AND PONTE: A Book of Tuscan Games. Illustrated.
  _Royal 8vo._   21_s._ _net_.     See also St. Francis of Assisi.

=Hilbert (T.).= See Little Blue Books.

=Hill (Clare).= See Textbooks of Technology.

=Hill (Henry)=, B.A., Headmaster of the Boy’s High School, Worcester,
  Cape Colony. A SOUTH AFRICAN ARITHMETIC. _Cr. 8vo._   3_s._ 6_d._

=Hillegas (Howard C.).= WITH THE BOER FORCES. With 24 Illustrations.
  _Second Edition._ _Cr. 8vo._   6_s._

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

=Hind (C. Lewis).= DAYS IN CORNWALL. With 16 Illustrations in Colour by
  WILLIAM PASCOE, and 20 Photographs. _Cr. 8vo._   6_s._

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

=Hirst (F. W.)= See Books on Business.

=Hoare (J. Douglas).= ARCTIC EXPLORATION. With 18 Illustrations and
  Maps. _Demy 8vo._   7_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Hobhouse (Emily).= THE BRUNT OF THE WAR. With Map and Illustrations.
  _Cr. 8vo._   6_s._

=Hobhouse (L. T.)=, Fellow of C.C.C., Oxford. THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE.
  _Demy 8vo._   10_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Hobson (J. A.)=, M.A. INTERNATIONAL TRADE: A Study of Economic
  Principles. _Cr. 8vo._   2_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

PROBLEMS OF POVERTY. _Sixth Edition. Cr. 8vo._   2_s._ 6_d._

THE PROBLEM OF THE UNEMPLOYED. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._   2_s._ 6_d._

=Hodgkin (T.)=, D.C.L. See Leaders of Religion.

=Hodgson (Mrs. W.).= HOW TO IDENTIFY OLD CHINESE PORCELAIN. _Second
  Edition. Post 8vo._   6_s._

=Hogg (Thomas Jefferson).= SHELLEY AT OXFORD. With an Introduction by R.
  A. STREATFEILD. _Fcap. 8vo._   2_s._ _net_.

=Holden-Stone (G. de).= See Books on Business.

=Holdich (Sir T. H.)=, K.C.I.E. THE INDIAN BORDERLAND: being a Personal
  Record of Twenty Years. Illustrated. _Demy 8vo._   10_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

=Holdsworth (W. S.)=, M.A. A HISTORY OF ENGLISH LAW. _In Two Volumes.
  Vol. I. Demy 8vo._   10_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Holland (Canon Scott).= See Library of Devotion.

=Holt (Emily).= THE SECRET OF POPULARITY: How to Achieve Social Success.
  _Cr. 8vo._   3_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

=Holyoake (G. J.).= THE CO-OPERATIVE MOVEMENT TO-DAY. _Fourth Edition.
  Cr. 8vo._   2_s._ 6_d._

=Hone (Nathaniel J.).= See Antiquary’s Books.

=Hoppner.= See Little Galleries and Little Books on Art.

=Horace.= See Classical Translations.

=Horsburgh (E. L. S.)=, M.A. WATERLOO: A Narrative and Criticism.
  With Plans. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._   5_s._
      See also Oxford Biographies.

=Horth (A. C.).= See Textbooks of Technology.

=Horton (R. F.)=, D.D. See Leaders of Religion.

=Hosie (Alexander).= MANCHURIA. With Illustrations and a Map. _Second
  Edition. Demy 8vo._   7_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

=How (F. D.).= SIX GREAT SCHOOLMASTERS. With Portraits and
  Illustrations. _Second Edition. Demy 8vo._   7_s._ 6_d._

=Howell (A. G. Ferrers).= FRANCISCAN DAYS. Translated and arranged by.
  _Cr. 8vo._   3_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Howell (G.).= TRADE UNIONISM—NEW AND OLD. _Fourth Edition. Cr. 8vo._
    2_s._ 6_d._

=Hudson (Robert).= MEMORIALS OF A WARWICKSHIRE PARISH. Illustrated.
  _Demy 8vo._   15_s._ _net_.

=Huggins (Sir William)=, K.C.B., O.M., D.C.L., F.R.S. THE ROYAL SOCIETY;
  OR, SCIENCE IN THE STATE AND IN THE SCHOOLS. With 25 Illustrations.
  _Wide Royal 8vo._   4_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Hughes (C. E.).= THE PRAISE OF SHAKESPEARE. An English Anthology. With
  a Preface by SIDNEY LEE. _Demy 8vo._   3_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Hughes (Thomas).= TOM BROWN’S SCHOOLDAYS. With an Introduction and
  Notes by VERNON RENDALL. _Leather. Royal 32mo._   2_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Hutchinson (Horace G.).= THE NEW FOREST. Illustrated in colour with 50
  Pictures by WALTER TYNDALE and 4 by LUCY KEMP-WELCH. _A Cheaper
  Edition. Cr. 8vo._   6_s._

=Hutton (A. W.)=, M.A.   See Leaders of Religion and Library of
  Devotion.

=Hutton (Edward).= THE CITIES OF UMBRIA. With many Illustrations, of
  which 20 are in Colour, by A. PISA. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._   6_s._

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

THE CITIES OF SPAIN. _Second Edition._ With many Illustrations, of which
  24 are in Colour, by A. W. RIMINGTON. _Demy 8vo._   7_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

FLORENCE AND NORTHERN TUSCANY. With Coloured Illustrations by WILLIAM
  PARKINSON.   6_s._

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

ENGLISH LOVE POEMS. Edited with an Introduction. _Fcap. 8vo._   3_s._
  6_d._ _net_.

=Hutton (R. H.).= See Leaders of Religion.

=Hutton (W. H.)=, M.A. THE LIFE OF SIR THOMAS MORE. With Portraits.
  _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._   5_s._     See also Leaders of Religion.

=Hyett (F. A.).= A SHORT HISTORY OF FLORENCE. _Demy 8vo._   7_s._ 6_d._
  _net_.

=Ibsen (Henrik).= BRAND. A Drama. Translated by WILLIAM WILSON. _Third
  Edition. Cr. 8vo._   3_s._ 6_d._

=Inge (W. R.)=, M.A., Fellow and Tutor of Hertford College, Oxford.
  CHRISTIAN MYSTICISM. The Bampton Lectures for 1899. _Demy 8vo._
    12_s._ 6_d._ _net_. See also Library of Devotion.

=Innes (A. D.)=, M.A. A HISTORY OF THE BRITISH IN INDIA. With Maps and
  Plans. _Cr. 8vo._   6_s._

ENGLAND UNDER THE TUDORS. With Maps. _Demy 8vo._   10_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Jackson (C. E.)=, B.A. See Textbooks of Science.

=Jackson (S.)=, M.A. See Commercial Series.

=Jackson (F. Hamilton).= See Little Guides.

=Jacob (F.)=, M.A. See Junior Examination Series.

=James (W. H. N.)=, A.R.C.S., A.I.E.E. See Textbooks of Technology.

=Jeans (J. Stephen).= TRUSTS, POOLS, AND CORNERS. _Cr. 8vo._   2_s._
  6_d._     See also Books on Business.

=Jeffreys (D. Gwyn).= DOLLY’S THEATRICALS. Described and Illustrated
  with 24 Coloured Pictures. _Super Royal 16mo._   2_s._ 6_d._

=Jenks (E.)=, M.A., Reader of Law in the University of Oxford. ENGLISH
  LOCAL GOVERNMENT. _Cr. 8vo._ 2_s._ 6_d._

=Jenner (Mrs. H.).= See Little Books on Art.

=Jennings (Oscar)=, M.D., Member of the Bibliographical Society. EARLY
  WOODCUT INITIALS, containing over thirteen hundred Reproductions of
  Pictorial Letters of the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Centuries. _Demy
  4to._   21_s._ _net_.

=Jessopp (Augustus)=, D.D. See Leaders of Religion.

=Jevons (F. B.)=, M.A., Litt.D., Principal of Bishop Hatfield’s Hall,
  Durham. RELIGION IN EVOLUTION. _Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

      See also Churchman’s Library and Handbooks of Theology.

=Johnson (Mrs. Barham).= WILLIAM BODHAM DONNE AND HIS FRIENDS.
  Illustrated. _Demy 8vo._ 10_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Johnston (Sir H. H.)=, K.C.B. BRITISH CENTRAL AFRICA. With nearly 200
  Illustrations and Six Maps. _Third Edition._ _Cr. 4to._   18_s._
  _net_.

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

=Jones (R. Crompton)=, M.A. POEMS OF THE INNER LIFE. Selected by.
  _Thirteenth Edition._ _Fcap. 8vo._ 2_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Jones (H.).= See Commercial Series.

=Jones (H. F.).= See Textbooks of Science.

=Jones (L. A. Atherley)=, K.C., M.P. THE MINERS’ GUIDE TO THE COAL MINES
  REGULATION ACTS. _Cr. 8vo._ 2_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

COMMERCE IN WAR. _Royal 8vo._ 21_s._ _net_.

=Jonson (Ben).= See Standard Library.

=Juliana (Lady) of Norwich.= REVELATIONS OF DIVINE LOVE. Edited by GRACE
  WARRACK. _Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._

=Juvenal.= See Classical Translations.

=‘Kappa.’= LET YOUTH BUT KNOW: A Plea for Reason in Education. _Cr.
  8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Kaufmann (M.).= SOCIALISM AND MODERN THOUGHT. _Second Edition._ _Cr.
  8vo._ 2_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Keating (J. F.)=, D.D. THE AGAPE AND THE EUCHARIST. _Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._
  6_d._

=Keats (John).= THE POEMS OF. Edited with Introduction and Notes by E.
  DE SELINCOURT, M.A. _Demy 8vo._ 7_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

REALMS OF GOLD. Selections from the Works of. _Fcap. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._
  _net_.

      See also Little Library and Standard Library.

=Keble (John).= THE CHRISTIAN YEAR. With an Introduction and Notes by W.
  LOCK, D.D., Warden of Keble College. Illustrated by R. ANNING BELL.
  _Third Edition._ _Fcap. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._; _padded morocco_, 5_s._

      See also Library of Devotion.

=Kelynack (T. N.)=, M.D., M.R.C.P., Hon. Secretary of the Society for
  the Study of Inebriety. THE DRINK PROBLEM IN ITS MEDICO-SOCIOLOGICAL
  ASPECT. Edited by. With 2 Diagrams. _Demy 8vo._ 7_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Kempis (Thomas à).= THE IMITATION OF CHRIST. With an Introduction by
  DEAN FARRAR. Illustrated by C. M. GERE. _Third Edition._ _Fcap. 8vo._
  3_s._ 6_d._; _padded morocco_. 5_s._

      Also Translated by C. BIGG, D.D. _Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._ See also
  Library of Devotion and Standard Library.

=Kennedy (Bart.).= THE GREEN SPHINX. _Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

=Kennedy (James Houghton)=, D.D., Assistant Lecturer in Divinity in the
  University of Dublin. ST. PAUL’S SECOND AND THIRD EPISTLES TO THE
  CORINTHIANS. With Introduction, Dissertations and Notes. _Cr. 8vo._
  6_s._

=Kimmins (C. W.)=, M.A. THE CHEMISTRY OF LIFE AND HEALTH. Illustrated.
  _Cr. 8vo._ 2_s._ 6_d._

=Kinglake (A. W.).= See Little Library.

=Kipling (Rudyard).= BARRACK-ROOM BALLADS. _80th Thousand. Twenty-second
  Edition._ _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

THE SEVEN SEAS. _62nd Thousand. Tenth Edition._ _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

THE FIVE NATIONS. _41st Thousand. Second Edition._ _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

DEPARTMENTAL DITTIES. _Sixteenth Edition._ _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

=Knight (Albert E.).= THE COMPLETE CRICKETER. Illustrated. _Demy 8vo._
  7_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

=Knight (H. J. C.)=, M.A. See Churchman’s Bible.

=Knowling (R. J.)=, M.A., Professor of New Testament Exegesis at King’s
  College, London. See Westminster Commentaries.

=Lamb= (=Charles= and =Mary=), THE WORKS OF. Edited by E. V. LUCAS.
  Illustrated. _In Seven Volumes._ _Demy 8vo._ 7_s._ 6_d._ _each_.

      See also Little Library and E. V. Lucas.

=Lambert (F. A. H.).= See Little Guides.

=Lambros (Professor).= See Byzantine Texts.

=Lane-Poole (Stanley).= A HISTORY OF EGYPT IN THE MIDDLE AGES. Fully
  Illustrated. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Langbridge (F.)=, M.A. BALLADS OF THE BRAVE: Poems of Chivalry,
  Enterprise, Courage, and Constancy. _Second Edition._ _Cr. 8vo._ 2_s._
  6_d._

=Law (William).= See Library of Devotion and Standard Library.

=Leach (Henry).= THE DUKE OF DEVONSHIRE. A Biography. With 12
  Illustrations. _Demy 8vo._ 12_S._ 6_d._ _net_.

      See also James Braid.

=Le Braz (Anatole).= THE LAND OF PARDONS. Translated by FRANCES M.
  GOSTLING. Illustrated in colour. _Second Edition._ _Demy 8vo._ 7_s._
  6_d._ _net_.

=Lee (Captain L. Melville).= A HISTORY OF POLICE IN ENGLAND. _Cr. 8vo._
  3_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Leigh (Percival).= THE COMIC ENGLISH GRAMMAR. Embellished with upwards
  of 50 characteristic Illustrations by JOHN LEECH. _Post 16mo._ 2_s._
  6_d._ _net_.

=Lewes (V. B.)=, M.A. AIR AND WATER. Illustrated. _Cr. 8vo._ 2_s._ 6_d._

=Lewis (Mrs. Gwyn).= A CONCISE HANDBOOK OF GARDEN SHRUBS. Illustrated.
  _Fcap. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Lisle (Fortunéede).= See Little Books on Art.

=Littlehales (H.).= See Antiquary’s Books.

=Lock (Walter)=, D.D., Warden of Keble College. ST. PAUL, THE
  MASTER-BUILDER. Second Edition. _Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._

THE BIBLE AND CHRISTIAN LIFE. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

      See also Leaders of Religion and Library of Devotion.

=Locker (F.).= See Little Library.

=Lodge (Sir Oliver)=, F.R.S. THE SUBSTANCE OF FAITH ALLIED WITH SCIENCE:
  A Catechism for Parents and Teachers. _Cr. 8vo._ 2_s._ _net_.

=Lofthouse (W. F.)=, M.A. ETHICS AND ATONEMENT. With a Frontispiece.
  _Demy 8vo._ 5_s._ _net_.

=Longfellow (H. W.).= See Little Library.

=Lorimer (George Horace).= LETTERS FROM A SELF-MADE MERCHANT TO HIS SON.
  _Fifteenth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

OLD GORGON GRAHAM. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

=Lover (Samuel).= See I. P. L.

=E. V. L.= and =C. L. G.= ENGLAND DAY BY DAY: Or, The Englishman’s
  Handbook to Efficiency. Illustrated by GEORGE MORROW. _Fourth Edition.
  Fcap. 4to._   1_s._ _net_.

=Lucas (E. V.).= THE LIFE OF CHARLES LAMB. With 25 Illustrations. _Third
  Edition. Demy 8vo._ 7_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

A WANDERER IN HOLLAND. With many Illustrations, of which 20 are in
  Colour by HERBERT MARSHALL. _Seventh Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

A WANDERER IN LONDON. With 16 Illustrations in Colour by NELSON DAWSON,
  and 36 other Illustrations. _Fourth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

FIRESIDE AND SUNSHINE. _Third Edition. Fcap. 8vo._ 5_s._

THE OPEN ROAD: a Little Book for Wayfarers. _Tenth Edition. Fcap. 8vo._
  5_s._; _India Paper_, 7_s._ 6_d._

THE FRIENDLY TOWN: a Little Book for the Urbane. _Third Edition. Fcap.
  8vo._ 5_s._; _India Paper_, 7_s._ 6_d._

=Lucian.= See Classical Translations.

=Lyde (L. W.)=, M.A. See Commercial Series.

=Lydon (Noel S.).= See Junior School Books.

=Lyttelton (Hon. Mrs. A.).= WOMEN AND THEIR WORK. _Cr. 8vo._ 2_s._ 6_d._

=Macaulay (Lord).= CRITICAL AND HISTORICAL ESSAYS. Edited by F. C.
  MONTAGUE, M.A. _Three Volumes. Cr. 8vo._ 18_s._

      The only edition of this book completely annotated.

=M’Allen (J. E. B.)=, M.A. See Commercial Series.

=MacCulloch (J. A.).= See Churchman’s Library.

=MacCunn (Florence A.).= MARY STUART. With over 60 Illustrations,
  including a Frontispiece in Photogravure. _Second and Cheaper Edition.
  Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

      See also Leaders of Religion.

=McDermott (E. R.).= See Books on Business.

=M’Dowall (A. S.).= See Oxford Biographies.

=Mackay (A. M.).= See Churchman’s Library.

=Macklin (Herbert W.)=, M.A. See Antiquary’s Books.

=Mackenzie (W. Leslie)=, M.A., M.D., D.P.H., etc. THE HEALTH OF THE
  SCHOOL CHILD. _Cr. 8vo._ 2_s._ 6_d._

=Mdlle Mori= (=Author of=). ST. CATHERINE OF SIENA AND HER TIMES. With
  28 Illustrations. _Demy 8vo._ 7_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Magnus (Laurie)=, M.A. A PRIMER OF WORDSWORTH. _Cr. 8vo._ 2_s._ 6_d._

=Mahaffy (J. P.)=, Litt.D. A HISTORY OF THE EGYPT OF THE PTOLEMIES.
  Fully Illustrated. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Maitland (F. W.)=, LL.D., Downing Professor of the Laws of England in
  the University of Cambridge. CANON LAW IN ENGLAND. _Royal 8vo._ 7_s._
  6_d._

=Malden (H. E.)=, M.A.  ENGLISH RECORDS. A Companion to the History of
  England. _Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._

THE ENGLISH CITIZEN: HIS RIGHTS AND DUTIES. _Sixth Edition. Cr. 8vo._
  1_s._ 6_d._

      See also School Histories.

=Marchant (E. C.)=, M.A., Fellow of Peterhouse, Cambridge. A GREEK
  ANTHOLOGY. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._

      See also A. M. Cook.

=Marr (J. E.)=, F.R.S., Fellow of St. John’s College, Cambridge. THE
  SCIENTIFIC STUDY OF SCENERY. _Second Edition._ Illustrated. _Cr. 8vo._
  6_s._

AGRICULTURAL GEOLOGY. Illustrated. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Marriott (J. A. R.).= FALKLAND AND HIS TIMES. With 20 Illustrations.
  _Demy 8vo._ 7_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

=Marvell (Andrew).= See Little Library.

=Masefield (John).= SEA LIFE IN NELSON’S TIME. Illustrated. _Cr. 8vo._
  3_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

ON THE SPANISH MAIN. With 22 Illustrations and a Map. _Demy 8vo._ 10_s._
  6_d._ _net_.

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

A SAILOR’S GARLAND. Edited and Selected by. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._
  3_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Maskell (A.).= See Connoisseur’s Library.

=Mason (A. J.)=, D.D. See Leaders of Religion.

=Massee (George).= THE EVOLUTION OF PLANT LIFE: Lower Forms.
  Illustrated. _Cr. 8vo._ 2_s._ 6_d._

=Masterman (C. F. G.)=, M.A., M.P. TENNYSON AS A RELIGIOUS TEACHER. _Cr.
  8vo._ 6_s._

=Matheson (Mrs. E. F.).= COUNSELS OF LIFE. _Fcap. 8vo._ 2_s._ 6_d._
  _net_.

=May (Phil).= THE PHIL MAY ALBUM. _Second Edition. 4to._   1_s._ _net_.

=Mellows (Emma S.).= A SHORT STORY OF ENGLISH LITERATURE. _Cr. 8vo._
  3_s._ 6_d._

=Methuen (A. M. S.).= THE TRAGEDY OF SOUTH AFRICA. _Cr. 8vo._ 2_s._
  _net_. _Also Cr. 8vo._ 3_d._ _net_.

      A revised and enlarged edition of the author’s ‘Peace or War in
  South Africa.’

ENGLAND’S RUIN: DISCUSSED IN SIXTEEN LETTERS TO THE RIGHT HON. JOSEPH
  CHAMBERLAIN, M.P. _Seventh Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 3_d._ _net_.

=Miles (Eustace)=, M.A. LIFE AFTER LIFE, OR, THE THEORY OF
  REINCARNATION. _Cr. 8vo._ 2_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Millais (J. G.).= THE LIFE AND LETTERS OF SIR JOHN EVERETT MILLAIS,
  President of the Royal Academy. With many Illustrations, of which 2
  are in Photogravure. _New Edition. Demy 8vo._ 7_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

=Millin (G. F.).= PICTORIAL GARDENING. Illustrated. _Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._
  6_d._ _net_.

=Millis (C. T.)=, M.I.M.E. See Textbooks of Technology.

=Milne (J. G.)=, M.A. A HISTORY OF ROMAN EGYPT. Fully Illustrated. _Cr.
  8vo._ 6_s._

=Milton (John).= A DAY BOOK OF. Edited by R. F. Towndrow. _Fcap. 8vo._
  3_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

      See also Little Library, Standard Library.

=Minchin (H. C.)=, M.A. See R. Peel.

=Mitchell (P. Chalmers)=, M.A. OUTLINES OF BIOLOGY. Illustrated. _Second
  Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Milton (G. E.).= JANE AUSTEN AND HER TIMES. With many Portraits and
  Illustrations. _Second and Cheaper Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

=Moffat (Mary M.).= QUEEN LOUISA OF PRUSSIA. With 20 Illustrations.
  _Third Edition. Demy 8vo._ 7_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

‘=Moll (A.).=’ See Books on Business.

=Moir (D. M.).= See Little Library.

=Molinos (Dr. Michael de).= See Library of Devotion.

=Money (L. G. Chiozza)=, M.P. RICHES AND POVERTY. _Third Edition. Demy
  8vo._ 5_s._ _net_.

=Montagu (Henry)=, Earl of Manchester. See Library of Devotion.

=Montaigne.= A DAY BOOK OF. Edited by C. F. POND. _Fcap. 8vo._ 3_s._
  6_d._ _net_.

=Moore (H. E.).= BACK TO THE LAND. An Inquiry into Rural Depopulation.
  _Cr. 8vo._ 2_s._ 6_d._

=Montmorency (J. E. G. de)=, B.A., LL.B. THOMAS À KEMPIS, HIS AGE AND
  BOOK. With 22 Illustrations. _Second Edition. Demy 8vo._ 7_s._ 6_d._
  _net_.

=Moorhouse (E. Hallam).= NELSON’S LADY HAMILTON. With 51 Portraits.
  _Second Edition. Demy 8vo._ 7_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

=Moran (Clarence G.).= See Books on Business.

=More (Sir Thomas).= See Standard Library.

=Morfill (W. R.)=, Oriel College, Oxford. A HISTORY OF RUSSIA FROM PETER
  THE GREAT TO ALEXANDER II. With Maps and Plans. _Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._

=Morich (R. J.)=, late of Clifton College. See School Examination
  Series.

=Morris (J.).= THE MAKERS OF JAPAN. With 24 Illustrations. _Demy 8vo._
  12_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

=Morris (J. E.).= See Little Guides.

=Morton (Miss Anderson).= See Miss Brodrick.

=Moule (H. C. G.)=, D.D., Lord Bishop of Durham. See Leaders of
  Religion.

=Muir (M. M. Pattison)=, M.A. THE CHEMISTRY OF FIRE. Illustrated. _Cr.
  8vo._ 2_s._ 6_d._

=Mundella (V. A.)=, M.A. See J. T. Dunn.

=Munro (R.)=, LL.D. See Antiquary’s Books.

=Naval Officer (A).= See I. P. L.

=Neal (W. G.).= See R. N. Hall.

=Newman (Ernest).= HUGO WOLF. _Demy 8vo._ 6_s._

=Newman (George)=, M.D., D.P.H., F.R.S.E., Lecturer on Public Health at
  St. Bartholomew’s Hospital, and Medical Officer of Health of the
  Metropolitan Borough of Finsbury. INFANT MORTALITY, A SOCIAL PROBLEM.
  With 16 Diagrams. _Demy 8vo._ 7_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Newman (J. H.) and others.= See Library of Devotion.

=Nichols (J. B. B.).= See Little Library.

=Nicklin (T.)=, M.A. EXAMINATION PAPERS IN THUCYDIDES. _Cr. 8vo._ 2_s._

=Nimrod.= See I. P. L.

=Norgate (Grys Le G.).= THE LIFE OF SIR WALTER SCOTT. Illustrated. _Demy
  8vo._ 7_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Norregaard (B. W.).= THE GREAT SIEGE: The Investment and Fall of Port
  Arthur. Illustrated. _Demy 8vo._ 7_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Norway (A. H.).= NAPLES. With 25 Coloured Illustrations by MAURICE
  GREIFFENHAGEN. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Novalis.= THE DISCIPLES AT SAÏS AND OTHER FRAGMENTS. Edited by Miss UNA
  BIRCH. _Fcap. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._

=Oldfield (W. J.)=, M.A., Prebendary of Lincoln. A PRIMER OF RELIGION.
  BASED ON THE CATECHISM OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND. _Fcap. 8vo._ 2_s._
  6_d._

=Oldham (F. M.)=, B.A. See Textbooks of Science.

=Oliphant (Mrs.).= See Leaders of Religion.

=Oman (C. W. C.)=, M.A., Fellow of All Souls’, Oxford. A HISTORY OF THE
  ART OF WAR. The Middle Ages, from the Fourth to the Fourteenth
  Century. Illustrated. _Demy 8vo._ 10_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Ottley (R. L.)=, D.D. See Handbooks of Theology and Leaders of
  Religion.

=Overton (J. H.).= See Leaders of Religion.

=Owen (Douglas).= See Books on Business.

=Oxford (M. N.)=, of Guy’s Hospital. A HANDBOOK OF NURSING. _Third
  Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._

=Pakes (W. C. C.).= THE SCIENCE OF HYGIENE. Illustrated. _Demy 8vo._
  15_s._

=Palmer (Frederick).= WITH KUROKI IN MANCHURIA. Illustrated. _Third
  Edition. Demy 8vo._ 7_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Parker (Gilbert).= A LOVER’S DIARY. _Fcap. 8vo._ 5_s._

=Parkes (A. K.).= SMALL LESSONS ON GREAT TRUTHS. _Fcap. 8vo._ 1_s._
  6_d._

=Parkinson (John).= PARADISI IN SOLE PARADISUS TERRESTRIS, OR A GARDEN
  OF ALL SORTS OF PLEASANT FLOWERS. _Folio._ £3, 3_s._ _net_.

=Parmenter (John).= HELIO-TROPES, OR NEW POSIES FOR SUNDIALS, 1625.
  Edited by PERCIVAL LANDON. _Quarto._ 3_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Parmentier (Prof. Leon).= See Byzantine Texts.

=Parsons (Mrs. Clement).= GARRICK AND HIS CIRCLE. With 36 Illustrations.
  _Second Edition. Demy 8vo._ 12_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

=Pascal.= See Library of Devotion.

=Paston (George).= SOCIAL CARICATURE IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. With
  over 200 Illustrations. _Imperial Quarto._   £2, 12_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

      See also Little Books on Art and I.P.L.

LADY MARY WORTLEY MONTAGU. With 24 Portraits and Illustrations. _Demy
  8vo._ 15_s._ _net_.

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

=Paterson (W. R.)= (Benjamin Swift). LIFE’S QUESTIONINGS. _Cr. 8vo._
  3_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Patterson (A. H.).= NOTES OF AN EAST COAST NATURALIST. Illustrated in
  Colour by F. SOUTHGATE. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

NATURE IN EASTERN NORFOLK. A series of observations on the Birds,
  Fishes, Mammals, Reptiles, and Stalk-eyed Crustaceans found in that
  neighbourhood, with a list of the species. With 12 Illustrations in
  colour, by FRANK SOUTHGATE. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Peacock (N.).= See Little Books on Art.

=Peake (C. M. A.)=, F.R.H.S.  A HANDBOOK OF ANNUALS AND BIENNIALS. With
  24 Illustrations. _Fcap. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Pearce (E. H.)=, M.A.  ANNALS OF CHRIST’S HOSPITAL. Illustrated. _Demy
  8vo._ 7_s._ 6_d._

=Peel (Robert)=, and =Minchin (H. C.)=, M.A., OXFORD. With 100
  Illustrations in Colour. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Peel (Sidney)=, late Fellow of Trinity College, Oxford, and Secretary
  to the Royal Commission on the Licensing Laws. PRACTICAL LICENSING
  REFORM. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 1_s._ 6_d._

=Peters (J. P.)=, D.D. See Churchman’s Library.

=Petrie (W. M. Flinders)=, D.C.L., LL.D., Professor of Egyptology at
  University College. A HISTORY OF EGYPT, FROM THE EARLIEST TIMES TO THE
  PRESENT DAY. Fully Illustrated. _In six volumes. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._
  _each_.

VOL. I. PREHISTORIC TIMES TO XVITH DYNASTY. _Fifth Edition._

VOL. II. THE XVIITH AND XVIIITH DYNASTIES. _Fourth Edition._

VOL. III. XIXTH TO XXXTH DYNASTIES.

VOL. IV. THE EGYPT OF THE PTOLEMIES. J. P. MAHAFFY, Litt.D.

VOL. V. ROMAN EGYPT. J. G. MILNE, M.A.

VOL. VI. EGYPT IN THE MIDDLE AGES. STANLEY LANE-POOLE, M.A.

RELIGION AND CONSCIENCE IN ANCIENT EGYPT. Illustrated. _Cr. 8vo._ 2_s._
  6_d._

SYRIA AND EGYPT, FROM THE TELL EL AMARNA TABLETS. _Cr. 8vo._ 2_s._ 6_d._

EGYPTIAN TALES. Illustrated by TRISTRAM ELLIS. _In Two Volumes. Cr.
  8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._ _each_.

EGYPTIAN DECORATIVE ART. With 120 Illustrations. _Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._

=Phillips (W. A.).= See Oxford Biographies.

=Phillpotts (Eden).= MY DEVON YEAR. With 38 Illustrations by J. LEY
  PETHYBRIDGE. _Second and Cheaper Edition. Large Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

UP ALONG AND DOWN ALONG. Illustrated by CLAUDE SHEPPERSON. _Cr. 4to._
    5_s._ _net_.

      A volume of poems.

=Plarr (Victor G.).= See School Histories.

=Plato.= See Standard Library.

=Plautus.= THE CAPTIVI. Edited, with an Introduction, Textual Notes, and
  a Commentary, by W. M. LINDSAY, Fellow of Jesus College, Oxford. _Demy
  8vo._ 10_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Plowden-Wardlaw (J. T.)=, B.A., King’s College, Cambridge. See School
  Examination Series.

=Podmore (Frank).= MODERN SPIRITUALISM. _Two Volumes. Demy 8vo._ 21_s._
  _net_.

      A History and a Criticism.

=Poer (J. Patrick Le).= A MODERN LEGIONARY. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Pollard (Alice).= See Little Books on Art.

=Pollard (A. W.).= OLD PICTURE BOOKS. Illustrated. _Demy 8vo._ 7_s._
  6_d._ _net_.

=Pollard (Eliza F.).= See Little Books on Art.

=Pollock (David)=, M.I.N.A. See Books on Business.

=Potter (M. C.)=, M.A., F.L.S. A TEXT-BOOK OF AGRICULTURAL BOTANY.
  Illustrated. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 4_s._ 6_d._

=Power (J. O’Connor).= THE MAKING OF AN ORATOR. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Prance (G.).= See R. Wyon.

=Prescott (O. L.).= ABOUT MUSIC, AND WHAT IT IS MADE OF. _Cr. 8vo._
  3_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Price (L. L.)=, M.A., Fellow of Oriel College, Oxon. A HISTORY OF
  ENGLISH POLITICAL ECONOMY. _Fourth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 2_s._ 6_d._

=Primrose (Deborah).= A MODERN BŒOTIA. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Protheroe (Ernest).= THE DOMINION OF MAN. GEOGRAPHY IN ITS HUMAN
  ASPECT. With 32 full-page Illustrations. _Cr. 8vo._ 2_s._

=Pugin= and =Rowlandson=. THE MICROCOSM OF LONDON, OR LONDON IN
  MINIATURE. With 104 Illustrations in colour. _In Three Volumes. Small
  4to._ £3, 3_s._ _net_.

=‘Q’ (A. T. Quiller Couch).= THE GOLDEN POMP. A PROCESSION OF ENGLISH
  LYRICS. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 2_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Quevedo Villegas.= See Miniature Library.

=G. R.= and =E.S.= THE WOODHOUSE CORRESPONDENCE. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

=Rackham (R. B.)=, M.A. See Westminster Commentaries.

=Ragg (Laura M.).= THE WOMEN-ARTISTS OF BOLOGNA. With 20 Illustrations.
  _Demy 8vo._ 7_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Ragg (Lonsdale)=, B.D., Oxon. DANTE AND HIS ITALY. With 32
  Illustrations largely from contemporary Frescoes and Documents. _Demy
  8vo._ 12_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Rahtz (F. J.)=, M.A., B.Sc., Lecturer in English at Merchant Venturers’
  Technical College, Bristol. HIGHER ENGLISH. _Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._

=Randolph (B. W.)=, D.D. See Library of Devotion.

=Rannie (D. W.)=, M.A. A STUDENT’S HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. _Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._
  6_d._

=Rashdall (Hastings)=, M.A., Fellow and Tutor of New College, Oxford.
  DOCTRINE AND DEVELOPMENT. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Raven (J. J.)=, D.D. See Antiquary’s Books.

=Rawstorne (Lawrence, Esq.).= See I.P.L.

=Raymond (Walter).= See School Histories.

=A Real Paddy.= See I.P.L.

=Reason (W.)=, M.A. UNIVERSITY AND SOCIAL SETTLEMENTS. _Cr. 8vo._ 2_s._
  6_d._

=Redpath (H. A.)=, M.A. See Westminster Commentaries.

=Reynolds.= See Little Galleries.

=Rhoades (J. F.).= See Simplified French Texts.

=Rhodes (W. E.).= See School Histories.

=Rieu (H.)=, M.A. See Simplified French Texts.

=Roberts (M. E.).= See C. C. Channer.

=Robertson (A.)=, D.D., Lord Bishop of Exeter. REGNUM DEI. The Bampton
  Lectures of 1901. _Demy 8vo._ 7_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Robertson (C. Grant).= M.A., Fellow of All Souls’ College, Oxford,
  Examiner in the Honours School of Modern History, Oxford, 1901-1904.
  SELECT STATUTES, CASES, AND CONSTITUTIONAL DOCUMENTS, 1660-1832. _Demy
  8vo._ 10_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Robertson (C. Grant)= and =Bartholomew (J. G.)=, F.R.S.E., F.R.G.S. A
  HISTORICAL AND MODERN ATLAS OF THE BRITISH EMPIRE. _Demy Quarto._
  4_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Robertson (Sir G. S.)=, K.C.S.I. CHITRAL: THE STORY OF A MINOR SIEGE.
  _Third Edition._ Illustrated. _Cr. 8vo._ 2_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Robinson (A. W.)=, M.A. See Churchman’s Bible.

=Robinson (Cecilia).= THE MINISTRY OF DEACONESSES. With an Introduction
  by the late Archbishop of Canterbury. _Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._

=Robinson (F. S.).= See Connoisseur’s Library.

=Rochefoucauld (La).= See Little Library.

=Rodwell (G.)=, B.A. NEW TESTAMENT GREEK. A Course for Beginners. With a
  Preface by WALTER LOCK, D.D., Warden of Keble College. _Fcap. 8vo._
  3_s._ 6_d._

=Roe (Fred).= OLD OAK FURNITURE. With many Illustrations by the Author,
  including a frontispiece in colour. _Demy 8vo._ 10_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Rogers (A. G. L.)=, M.A. See Books on Business.

=Rose (Edward).= THE ROSE READER. Illustrated. _Cr. 8vo._ 2_s._ 6_d._
  _Also in 4 Parts. Parts I. and II._ 6_d._ _each_; _Part III._ 8_d._;
  _Part IV._ 10_d._

=Rowntree (Joshua).= THE IMPERIAL DRUG TRADE. A RE-STATEMENT OF THE
  OPIUM QUESTION. _Second and Cheaper Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 2_s._ _net_.

=Rubie (A. E.)=, D.D. See Junior School Books.

=Russell (W. Clark).= THE LIFE OF ADMIRAL LORD COLLINGWOOD. With
  Illustrations by F. BRANGWYN. _Fourth Edition._ _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Sainsbury (Harrington)=, M.D., F.R.C.P. PRINCIPIA THERAPEUTICA. _Demy
  8vo._ 7_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=St. Anselm.= See Library of Devotion.

=St. Augustine.= See Library of Devotion.

=St. Cyres (Viscount).= See Oxford Biographies.

=St. Francis of Assisi.= THE LITTLE FLOWERS OF THE GLORIOUS MESSER ST.
  FRANCIS AND HIS FRIARS. Newly translated by WILLIAM HEYWOOD. With an
  Introduction by A. G. F. HOWELL, and 40 Illustrations from Italian
  Painters. _Demy 8vo._ 5_s._ _net_.

      See also Standard Library and Library of Devotion.

=‘Saki’ (H. Munro).= REGINALD. _Second Edition. Fcap. 8vo._ 2_s._ 6_d._
  _net_.

=Sales (St. Francis de).= See Library of Devotion.

=Salmon (A. L.).= See Little Guides.

=Sargeaunt (J.)=, M.A. ANNALS OF WESTMINSTER SCHOOL. Illustrated. _Demy
  8vo._ 7_s._ 6_d._

=Sathas (C.).= See Byzantine Texts.

=Schmitt (John).= See Byzantine Texts.

=Scott (A. M.).= WINSTON SPENCER CHURCHILL. With Portraits and
  Illustrations. _Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._

=Scudamore (Cyril).= See Little Guides.

=Sells (V. P.)=, M.A. THE MECHANICS OF DAILY LIFE. Illustrated. _Cr.
  8vo._ 2_s._ 6_d._

=Selous (Edmund).= TOMMY SMITH’S ANIMALS. Illustrated by G. W. ORD.
  _Seventh Edition. Fcap. 8vo._ 2_s._ 6_d._

      _School Edition_, 1_s._ 6_d._

TOMMY SMITH’S OTHER ANIMALS. With 12 Illustrations by AUGUSTA GUEST.
  _Second Edition. Fcap. 8vo._ 2_s._ 6_d._

=Settle (J. H.).= ANECDOTES OF SOLDIERS. _Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Shakespeare (William).=

THE FOUR FOLIOS, 1623; 1632; 1664; 1685. Each £4, 4_s._ _net_, or a
  complete set, £12, 12_s._ _net_.

      Folios 3 and 4 are ready.

      Folio 2 is nearly ready.

      See also Arden and Little Quarto Shakespeare.

=Sharp (A.).= VICTORIAN POETS. _Cr. 8vo._ 2_s._ 6_d._

=Sharp (Cecil).= See S. Baring-Gould.

=Sharp (Mrs. E. A.).= See Little Books on Art.

=Shedlock (J. S.).= THE PIANOFORTE SONATA. _Cr. 8vo._ 5_s._

=Shelley (Percy B.).= ADONAIS; an Elegy on the death of John Keats,
  Author of ‘Endymion,’ etc. Pisa. From the types of Didot, 1821. 2_s._
  _net_.

=Sheppard (H. F.)=, M.A. See S. Baring-Gould.

=Sherwell (Arthur)=, M.A. LIFE IN WEST LONDON. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._
  2_s._ 6_d._

=Shipley (Mary E.).= AN ENGLISH CHURCH HISTORY FOR CHILDREN. With a
  Preface by the Bishop of Gibraltar. With Maps and Illustrations. Part
  I. _Cr. 8vo._ 2_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Sichel (Walter).= DISRAELI: A Study in Personality and Ideas. With 3
  Portraits. _Demy 8vo._ 12_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

      See also Oxford Biographies.

=Sime (J.).= See Little Books on Art.

=Simonson (G. A.).= FRANCESCO GUARDI. With 41 Plates. _Imperial 4to_,
  £2, 2_s._ _net_.

=Sketchley (R. E. D.).= See Little Books on Art.

=Skipton (H. P. K.).= See Little Books on Art.

=Sladen (Douglas).= SICILY: The New Winter Resort. With over 200
  Illustrations. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 5_s._ _net_.

=Small (Evan)=, M.A. THE EARTH. An Introduction to Physiography.
  Illustrated. _Cr. 8vo._ 2_s._ 6_d._

=Smallwood (M. G.).= See Little Books on Art.

=Smedley (F. E.).= See I.P.L.

=Smith (Adam).= THE WEALTH OF NATIONS. Edited with an Introduction and
  numerous Notes by EDWIN CANNAN, M.A. _Two volumes. Demy 8vo._ 21_s._
  _net_.

      See also Standard Library.

=Smith (Horace and James).= See Little Library.

=Smith (H. Bompas)=, M.A. A NEW JUNIOR ARITHMETIC. _Crown 8vo._ 2_s._
  With Answers, 2_s._ 6_d._

=Smith (Royde N. G.).= THE PILLOW BOOK: A GARNER OF MANY MOODS. _Second
  Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 4_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Smith (R. Mudie).= THOUGHTS FOR THE DAY. Edited by. _Fcap. 8vo._ 3_s._
  6_d._ _net_.

=Smith (Nowell C.).= See W. Wordsworth.

=Smith (John Thomas).= A BOOK FOR A RAINY DAY: Or, Recollections of the
  Events of the Years 1766-1833. Edited by WILFRED WHITTEN. Illustrated.
  _Wide Demy 8vo._ 12_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Snell (F. J.).= A BOOK OF EXMOOR. Illustrated. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Snowden (C. E.).= A HANDY DIGEST OF BRITISH HISTORY. _Demy 8vo._ 4_s._
  6_d._

=Sophocles.= See Classical Translations.

=Sornet (L. A.).= See Junior School Books.

=South (Wilton E.)=, M.A. See Junior School Books.

=Southey (R.).= ENGLISH SEAMEN. Edited by DAVID HANNAY.

      Vol. I. (Howard, Clifford, Hawkins, Drake, Cavendish). _Second
  Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

      Vol. II. (Richard Hawkins, Grenville, Essex, and Raleigh). _Cr.
  8vo._ 6_s._

      See also Standard Library.

=Spence (C. H.)=, M.A. See School Examination Series.

=Spicer (A. D.).= THE PAPER TRADE. With Maps and Diagrams. _Demy 8vo._
  12_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Spooner (W. A.)=, M.A. See Leaders of Religion.

=Staley (Edgcumbe).= THE GUILDS OF FLORENCE. Illustrated. _Second
  Edition. Royal 8vo._ 16_s._ _net_.

=Stanbridge (J. W.)=, B.D. See Library of Devotion.

‘=Stancliffe.=’ GOLF DO’S AND DONT’S. _Second Edition. Fcap. 8vo._ 1_s._

=Stead (D. W.).= See D. Gallaher.

=Stedman (A. M. M.)=, M.A.

INITIA LATINA: Easy Lessons on Elementary Accidence. _Ninth Edition.
  Fcap. 8vo._ 1_s._

FIRST LATIN LESSONS. _Tenth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 2_s._

FIRST LATIN READER. With Notes adapted to the Shorter Latin Primer and
  Vocabulary. _Sixth Edition revised. 18mo._ 1_s._ 6_d._

EASY SELECTIONS FROM CÆSAR. The Helvetian War. _Second Edition. 18mo._
  1_s._

EASY SELECTIONS FROM LIVY. The Kings of Rome. _18mo. Second Edition._
  1_s._ 6_d._

EASY LATIN PASSAGES FOR UNSEEN TRANSLATION. _Eleventh Ed. Fcap. 8vo._
  1_s._ 6_d._

EXEMPLA LATINA. First Exercises in Latin Accidence. With Vocabulary.
  _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 1_s._

EASY LATIN EXERCISES ON THE SYNTAX OF THE SHORTER AND REVISED LATIN
  PRIMER. With Vocabulary. _Eleventh and Cheaper Edition, re-written.
  Cr. 8vo._ 1_s._ 6_d._ _Original Edition._ 2_s._ 6_d._ KEY, 3_s._
  _net_.

THE LATIN COMPOUND SENTENCE: Rules and Exercises. _Second Edition. Cr.
  8vo._ 1_s._ 6_d._ With Vocabulary. 2_s._

NOTANDA QUAEDAM: Miscellaneous Latin Exercises on Common Rules and
  Idioms. _Fourth Edition. Fcap. 8vo._ 1_s._ 6_d._ With Vocabulary.
  2_s._ Key, 2_s._ _net_.

LATIN VOCABULARIES FOR REPETITION: Arranged according to Subjects.
  _Fourteenth Edition. Fcap. 8vo._ 1_s._ 6_d._

A VOCABULARY OF LATIN IDIOMS. _18mo. Second Edition._ 1_s._

STEPS TO GREEK. _Third Edition, revised. 18mo._ 1_s._

A SHORTER GREEK PRIMER. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 1_s._ 6_d._

EASY GREEK PASSAGES FOR UNSEEN TRANSLATION. _Third Edition, revised.
  Fcap. 8vo._ 1_s._ 6_d._

GREEK VOCABULARIES FOR REPETITION. Arranged according to Subjects.
  _Fourth Edition. Fcap. 8vo._ 1_s._ 6_d._

GREEK TESTAMENT SELECTIONS. For the use of Schools. With Introduction,
  Notes, and Vocabulary. _Fourth Edition. Fcap. 8vo._ 2_s._ 6_d._

STEPS TO FRENCH. _Seventh Edition. 18mo._ 8_d._

FIRST FRENCH LESSONS. _Seventh Edition, revised. Cr. 8vo._ 1_s._

EASY FRENCH PASSAGES FOR UNSEEN TRANSLATION. _Fifth Edition, revised.
  Fcap. 8vo._ 1_s._ 6_d._

EASY FRENCH EXERCISES ON ELEMENTARY SYNTAX. With Vocabulary. _Fourth
  Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 2_s._ 6_d._ KEY, 3_s._ _net_.

FRENCH VOCABULARIES FOR REPETITION: Arranged according to Subjects.
  _Thirteenth Edition. Fcap. 8vo._ 1_s._

      See also School Examination Series.

=Steel (R. Elliott)=, M.A., F.C.S. THE WORLD OF SCIENCE. With 147
  Illustrations. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 2_s._ 6_d._

      See also School Examination Series.

=Stephenson (C.)=, of the Technical College, Bradford, and =Suddards
  (F.)=, of the Yorkshire College, Leeds. ORNAMENTAL DESIGN FOR WOVEN
  FABRICS. Illustrated. _Demy 8vo. Third Edition._ 7_s._ 6_d._

=Stephenson (J.)=, M.A. THE CHIEF TRUTHS OF THE CHRISTIAN FAITH. _Cr.
  8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._

=Sterne (Laurence).= See Little Library.

=Sterry (W.)=, M.A. ANNALS OF ETON COLLEGE. Illustrated. _Demy 8vo._
  7_s._ 6_d._

=Steuart (Katherine).= BY ALLAN WATER. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Stevenson (R. L.).= THE LETTERS OF ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON TO HIS FAMILY
  AND FRIENDS. Selected and Edited by SIDNEY COLVIN. _Third Edition. Cr.
  8vo._ 12_s._

LIBRARY EDITION. _Demy 8vo. 2 vols._ 25_s._ _net_.

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

VAILIMA LETTERS. With an Etched Portrait by WILLIAM STRANG. _Fifth
  Edition. Cr. 8vo. Buckram._ 6_s._

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

THE LIFE OF R. L. STEVENSON. See G. Balfour.

=Stevenson (M. I.).= FROM SARANAC TO THE MARQUESAS. Being Letters
  written by Mrs. M. I. STEVENSON during 1887-8. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._ _net_.

LETTERS FROM SAMOA, 1891-95. Edited and arranged by M. C. BALFOUR. With
  many Illustrations. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._ _net_.

=Stoddart (Anna M.).= See Oxford Biographies.

=Stokes (F. G.)=, B.A. HOURS WITH RABELAIS. From the translation of SIR
  T. URQUHART and P. A. MOTTEUX. With a Portrait in Photogravure. _Cr.
  8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Stone (S. J.).= POEMS AND HYMNS. With a Memoir by F. G. ELLERTON, M.A.
  With Portrait. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Storr (Vernon F.)=, M.A., Lecturer in the Philosophy of Religion in
  Cambridge University; Examining Chaplain to the Archbishop of
  Canterbury; formerly Fellow of University College, Oxford. DEVELOPMENT
  AND DIVINE PURPOSE. _Cr. 8vo._ 5_s._ _net_.

=Straker (F.).= See Books on Business.

=Streane (A. W.)=, D.D. See Churchman’s Bible.

=Streatfeild (R. A.).= MODERN MUSIC AND MUSICIANS. With 24
  Illustrations. _Second Edition. Demy 8vo._ 7_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Stroud (H.)=, D.Sc., M.A. See Textbooks of Science.

=Strutt (Joseph).= THE SPORTS AND PASTIMES OF THE PEOPLE OF ENGLAND.
  Illustrated by many engravings. Revised by J. CHARLES COX, LL.D.,
  F.S.A. _Quarto._   21_s._ _net_.

=Stuart (Capt. Donald).= THE STRUGGLE FOR PERSIA. With a Map. _Cr. 8vo._
  6_s._

=Sturch (F.).=, Staff Instructor to the Surrey County Council. MANUAL
  TRAINING DRAWING (WOODWORK). Its Principles and Application, with
  Solutions to Examination Questions, 1892-1905, Orthographic, Isometric
  and Oblique Projection. With 50 Plates and 140 Figures. _Foolscap._
  5_s._ _net_.

=Suddards (F.).= See C. Stephenson.

=Surtees (R. S.).= See I.P.L.

=Symes (J. E.)=, M.A. THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._
  2_s._ 6_d._

=Sympson (E. M.)=, M.A., M.D. See Ancient Cities.

=Syrett (Netta).= See Little Blue Books.

=Tacitus.= AGRICOLA. With Introduction Notes, Map, etc., by R. F. DAVIS,
  M.A. _Fcap. 8vo._ 2_s._

GERMANIA. By the same Editor. _Fcap. 8vo._ 2_s._ See also Classical
  Translations.

=Tallack (W.).= HOWARD LETTERS AND MEMORIES. _Demy 8vo._ 10_s._ 6_d._
  _net_.

=Tauler (J.).= See Library of Devotion.

=Taylor (A. E.).= THE ELEMENTS OF METAPHYSICS. _Demy 8vo._ 10_s._ 6_d._
  _net_.

=Taylor (F. G.)=, M.A. See Commercial Series.

=Taylor (I. A.).= See Oxford Biographies.

=Taylor (John W.).= THE COMING OF THE SAINTS: Imagination and Studies in
  Early Church History and Tradition. With 26 Illustrations. _Demy 8vo._
  7_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Taylor (T. M.)=, M.A., Fellow of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge.
  A CONSTITUTIONAL AND POLITICAL HISTORY OF ROME. _Cr. 8vo._ 7_s._ 6_d._

=Tennyson (Alfred, Lord).= THE EARLY POEMS OF. Edited, with Notes and an
  Introduction, by J. CHURTON COLLINS, M.A. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

IN MEMORIAM, MAUD, AND THE PRINCESS. Edited by J. CHURTON COLLINS, M.A.
  _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._ See also Little Library.

=Terry (C. S.).= See Oxford Biographies.

=Thackeray (W. M.).= See Little Library.

=Theobald (F. V.)=, M.A. INSECT LIFE. Illustrated. _Second Edition
  Revised. Cr. 8vo._ 2_s._ 6_d._

=Thompson (A. H.).= See Little Guides.

=Tileston (Mary W.).= DAILY STRENGTH FOR DAILY NEEDS. _Thirteenth
  Edition. Medium 16mo._ 2_s._ 6_d._ _net_. Also an edition in superior
  binding, 6_s._

=Tompkins (H. W.)=, F.R.H.S. See Little Guides.

=Townley (Lady Susan).= MY CHINESE NOTE-BOOK. With 16 Illustrations and
  2 Maps. _Third Edition. Demy 8vo._ 10_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Toynbee (Paget)=, M.A., D.Litt. See Oxford Biographies.

=Trevelyan (G. M.)=, Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge. ENGLAND UNDER
  THE STUARTS. With Maps and Plans. _Second Edition. Demy 8vo._ 10_s._
  6_d._ _net_.

=Troutbeck (G. E.).= See Little Guides.

=Tyler (E. A.)=, B.A., F.C.S. See Junior School Books.

=Tyrrell-Gill (Frances).= See Little Books on Art.

=Vardon (Harry).= THE COMPLETE GOLFER. Illustrated. _Eighth Edition.
  Demy 8vo._ 10_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

=Vaughan (Henry).= See Little Library.

=Vaughan (Herbert M.)=, B.A. (Oxon.). THE LAST OF THE ROYAL STUARTS,
  HENRY STUART, CARDINAL, DUKE OF YORK. With 20 Illustrations. _Second
  Edition. Demy 8vo._ 10_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

THE NAPLES RIVERIA. With 25 Illustrations in Colour by MAURICE
  GREIFFENHAGEN. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

=Voegelin (A.)=, M.A. See Junior Examination Series.

=Waddell (Col. L. A.)=, LL.D., C.B. LHASA AND ITS MYSTERIES. With a
  Record of the Expedition of 1903-1904. With 155 Illustrations and
  Maps. _Third and Cheaper Edition. Demy 8vo._ 7_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Wade (G. W.)=, D.D. OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY. With Maps. _Fourth Edition.
  Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Wagner (Richard).= MUSIC DRAMAS: Interpretations, embodying Wagner’s
  own explanations. By A. L. CLEATHER and B. CRUMP. _In Four Volumes.
  Fcap. 8vo._ 2_s._ 6_d._ _each_.

      VOL. I.—THE RING OF THE NIBELUNG. _Third Edition._

      VOL. II.—PARSIFAL, LOHENGRIN, and THE HOLY GRAIL.

      VOL. III.—TRISTAN AND ISOLDE.

=Wall (J. C.).= DEVILS. Illustrated by the Author and from photographs.
  _Demy 8vo._ 4_s._ 6_d._ _net_. See also Antiquary’s Books.

=Walters (H. B.).= See Little Books on Art and Classics of Art.

=Walton (F. W.).= See School Histories.

=Walton (Izaac)= and =Cotton (Charles)=. See I.P.L., Standard Library,
  and Little Library.

=Warren-Vernon (Hon. William)=, M.A. READINGS ON THE INFERNO OF DANTE,
  based on the Commentary of BENVENUTO DA IMOLA and other authorities.
  With an Introduction by the Rev. Dr. MOORE. In Two Volumes. _Second
  Edition_, entirely re-written. _Cr. 8vo._ 15_s._ _net_.

=Waterhouse (Mrs. Alfred).= WITH THE SIMPLE-HEARTED: Little Homilies to
  Women in Country Places. _Second Edition. Small Pott 8vo._ 2_s._
  _net_.

      See also Little Library.

=Weatherhead (T. C.)=, M.A. EXAMINATION PAPERS IN HORACE. _Cr. 8vo._
  2_s._ See also Junior Examination Series.

=Webb (W. T.).= See Little Blue Books.

=Webber (F. C.).= See Textbooks of Technology.

=Weir (Archibald)=, M.A. AN INTRODUCTION TO THE HISTORY OF MODERN
  EUROPE. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Wells (Sidney H.).= See Textbooks of Science.

=Wells (J.)=, M.A., Fellow and Tutor of Wadham College. OXFORD AND
  OXFORD LIFE. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._

A SHORT HISTORY OF ROME. _Seventh Edition._ With 3 Maps. _Cr. 8vo._
  3_s._ 6_d._

      See also Little Guides.

=Wheldon (F. W.).= A LITTLE BROTHER TO THE BIRDS. With 15 Illustrations,
  7 of which are by A. H. BUCKLAND. _Large Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Whibley (C.).= See W. E. Henley.

=Whibley (L.)=, M.A., Fellow of Pembroke College, Cambridge. GREEK
  OLIGARCHIES: THEIR ORGANISATION AND CHARACTER. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Whitaker (G. H.)=, M.A. See Churchman’s Bible.

=White (Gilbert).= THE NATURAL HISTORY OF SELBORNE. Edited by L. C.
  MIALL, F.R.S., assisted by W. WARDE FOWLER, M.A. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

      See also Standard Library.

=Whitfield (E. E.).= See Commercial Series.

=Whitehead (A. W.).= GASPARD DE COLIGNY. Illustrated. _Demy 8vo._ 12_s._
  6_d._ _net_.

=Whiteley (R. Lloyd)=, F.I.C., Principal of the Municipal Science
  School, West Bromwich. AN ELEMENTARY TEXTBOOK OF INORGANIC CHEMISTRY.
  _Cr. 8vo._ 2_s._ 6_d._

=Whitley (Miss).= See Lady Dilke.

=Whitten (W.).= See John Thomas Smith.

=Whyte (A. G.)=, B.Sc. See Books on Business.

=Wilberforce (Wilfrid).= See Little Books on Art.

=Wilde (Oscar).= DE PROFUNDIS. _Seventh Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 5_s._ _net_.

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

THE DUCHESS OF PADUA. _Demy 8vo._ 12_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

POEMS. _Demy 8vo._ 12_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

INTENTIONS. _Demy 8vo._ 12_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

SALOME, AND OTHER PLAYS. _Demy 8vo._ 12_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

LADY WINDERMERE’S FAN. _Demy 8vo._ 12_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

A WOMAN OF NO IMPORTANCE. _Demy 8vo._ 12_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

AN IDEAL HUSBAND. _Demy 8vo._ 12_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

THE IMPORTANCE OF BEING EARNEST. _Demy 8vo._ 12_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

A HOUSE OF POMEGRANATES and THE HAPPY PRINCE. _Demy 8vo._ 12_s._ 6_d._
  _net_.

LORD ARTHUR SAVILE’S CRIME and OTHER PROSE PIECES. _Demy 8vo._ 12_s._
  6_d._ _net_.

=Wilkins (W. H.)=, B.A. THE ALIEN INVASION. _Cr. 8vo._ 2_s._ 6_d._

=Williams (A.).= PETROL PETER: or Pretty Stories and Funny Pictures.
  Illustrated in Colour by A. W. MILLS. _Demy 4to._   3_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Williamson (M. G.).= See Ancient Cities.

=Williamson (W.).= THE BRITISH GARDENER. Illustrated. _Demy 8vo._ 10_s._
  6_d._

=Williamson (W.)=, B.A. See Junior Examination Series, Junior School
  Books, and Beginner’s Books.

=Willson (Beckles).= LORD STRATHCONA: the Story of his Life.
  Illustrated. _Demy 8vo._ 7_s._ 6_d._

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

=Wilmot-Buxton (E. M.).= MAKERS OF EUROPE. _Cr. 8vo. Seventh Ed._ 3_s._
  6_d._

      A Text-book of European History for Middle Forms.

THE ANCIENT WORLD. With Maps and Illustrations. _Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._

      See also Beginner’s Books.

=Wilson (Bishop.).= See Library of Devotion.

=Wilson (A. J.).= See Books on Business.

=Wilson (H. A.).= See Books on Business.

=Wilson (J. A.).= See Simplified French Texts.

=Wilton (Richard)=, M.A. LYRA PASTORALIS: Songs of Nature, Church, and
  Home. _Pott 8vo._ 2_s._ 6_d._

=Winbolt (S. E.)=, M.A. EXERCISES IN LATIN ACCIDENCE. _Cr. 8vo._ 1_s._
  6_d._

LATIN HEXAMETER VERSE: An Aid to Composition. _Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._
  KEY, 5_s._ _net_.

=Windle (B. C. A.)=, F.R.S., F.S.A. See Antiquary’s Books, Little
  Guides, Ancient Cities, and School Histories.

=Winterbotham (Canon)=, M.A., B.Sc., LL.B. See Churchman’s Library.

=Wood (Sir Evelyn)=, F.M., V.C., G.C.B., G.C.M.G. FROM MIDSHIPMAN TO
  FIELD-MARSHAL. With 24 Illustrations and Maps. _Two Volumes. Fourth
  Edition. Demy 8vo._ 25_s._ _net_.

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

=Wood (J. A. E.).= See Textbooks of Technology.

=Wood (J. Hickory).= DAN LENO. Illustrated. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._
  6_s._

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

=Wood (W. Birkbeck)=, M.A., late Scholar of Worcester College, Oxford,
  and =Edmonds (Major J. E.)=, R.E., D.A.Q.-M.G. A HISTORY OF THE CIVIL
  WAR IN THE UNITED STATES. With an Introduction by H. SPENSER
  WILKINSON. With 24 Maps and Plans. _Demy 8vo._ 12_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Wordsworth (Christopher).= See Antiquary’s Books.

=Wordsworth (W.).= POEMS BY. Selected by STOPFORD A. BROOKE. With 40
  Illustrations by EDMUND H. NEW. With a Frontispiece in Photogravure.
  _Demy 8vo._ 7_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

=Wordsworth (W.)= and =Coleridge (S. T.)=. See Little Library.

=Wright (Arthur)=, M.A., Fellow of Queen’s College, Cambridge. See
  Churchman’s Library.

=Wright (C. Gordon).= See Dante.

=Wright (J. C.).= TO-DAY. _Demy 16mo._ 1_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Wright (Sophie).= GERMAN VOCABULARIES FOR REPETITION. _Fcap. 8vo._
  1_s._ 6_d._

=Wrong (George M.)=, Professor of History in the University of Toronto.
  THE EARL OF ELGIN. Illustrated. _Demy 8vo._ 7_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

=Wyatt (Kate M.).= See M. R. Gloag.

=Wylde (A. B.).= MODERN ABYSSINIA. With a Map and a Portrait. _Demy
  8vo._ 15_s._ _net_.

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

=Wyndham (Rt. Hon. George)=, M.P.  THE POEMS OF WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE.
  With an Introduction and Notes. _Demy 8vo. Buckram, gilt top._ 10_s._
  6_d._

=Wyon (R.)= and =Prance (G.)=. THE LAND OF THE BLACK MOUNTAIN. Being a
  Description of Montenegro. With 40 Illustrations. _Cr. 8vo._ 2_s._
  6_d._ _net_.

=Yeats (W. B.).= A BOOK OF IRISH VERSE. Selected from Modern Writers.
  _Revised and Enlarged Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._

=Young (Filson).= THE COMPLETE MOTORIST. With 138 Illustrations. _Sixth
  Edition. Demy 8vo._ 12_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

        A Colonial Edition is also published.

THE JOY OF THE ROAD: An Appreciation of the Motor Car. _Small Demy 8vo._
  5_s._ _net_.

=Young (T. M.).= THE AMERICAN COTTON INDUSTRY: A Study of Work and
  Workers. _Cr. 8vo. Cloth_, 2_s._ 6_d._; _paper boards_, 1_s._ 6_d._

=Zimmern (Antonia).= WHAT DO WE KNOW CONCERNING ELECTRICITY? _Fcap.
  8vo._ 1_s._ 6_d._ _net_.


                            =Ancient Cities=
             General Editor, B. C. A. WINDLE, D.Sc., F.R.S.
                    _Cr. 8vo._    4_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

CHESTER. By B. C. A. Windle, D.Sc., F.R.S. Illustrated by E. H. New.

SHREWSBURY. By T. Auden, M.A., F.S.A. Illustrated.

CANTERBURY. By J. C. Cox, LL.D., F.S.A. Illustrated.

EDINBURGH. By M. G. Williamson, M.A. Illustrated by Herbert Railton.

LINCOLN. By E. Mansel Sympson, M.A., M.D. Illustrated by E. H. New.

BRISTOL. By Alfred Harvey. Illustrated by E. H. New.

DUBLIN. By S. A. O. Fitzpatrick. Illustrated by W. C. Green.


                        =The Antiquary’s Books=
             General Editor, J. CHARLES COX, LL.D., F.S.A.
                   _Demy 8vo._    7_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

ENGLISH MONASTIC LIFE. By the Right Rev. Abbot Gasquet, O.S.B.
  Illustrated. _Third Edition._

REMAINS OF THE PREHISTORIC AGE IN ENGLAND. By B. C. A. Windle, D.Sc.,
  F.R.S. With numerous Illustrations and Plans.

OLD SERVICE BOOKS OF THE ENGLISH CHURCH. By Christopher Wordsworth,
  M.A., and Henry Littlehales. With Coloured and other Illustrations.

CELTIC ART. By J. Romilly Allen, F.S.A. With numerous Illustrations and
  Plans.

ARCHÆOLOGY AND FALSE ANTIQUITIES. By R. Munro, LL.D. Illustrated.

SHRINES OF BRITISH SAINTS. By J. C. Wall. With numerous Illustrations
  and Plans.

THE ROYAL FORESTS OF ENGLAND. By J. C. Cox, LL.D., F.S.A. Illustrated.

THE MANOR AND MANORIAL RECORDS. By Nathaniel J. Hone. Illustrated.

ENGLISH SEALS. By J. Harvey Bloom. Illustrated.

THE DOMESDAY INQUEST. By Adolphus Ballard, B.A., LL.B. With 27
  Illustrations.

THE BRASSES OF ENGLAND. By Herbert W. Macklin, M.A. With many
  Illustrations.

PARISH LIFE IN MEDIÆVAL ENGLAND. By the Right Rev. Abbott Gasquet,
  O.S.B. With many Illustrations. _Second Edition._

THE BELLS OF ENGLAND. By Canon J. J. Raven, D.D., F.S.A. With
  Illustrations. _Second Edition._


                        =The Arden Shakespeare=
             _Demy 8vo._    2_s._ 6_d._ _net each volume_.
                      General Editor, W. J. CRAIG.
     An edition of Shakespeare in single Plays. Edited with a full
 Introduction, Textual Notes, and a Commentary at the foot of the page.

HAMLET. Edited by Edward Dowden.

ROMEO AND JULIET. Edited by Edward Dowden.

KING LEAR. Edited by W. J. Craig.

JULIUS CAESAR. Edited by M. Macmillan.

THE TEMPEST. Edited by Moreton Luce.

OTHELLO. Edited by H. C. Hart.

TITUS ANDRONICUS. Edited by H. B. Baildon.

CYMBELINE. Edited by Edward Dowden.

THE MERRY WIVES OF WINDSOR. Edited by H. C. Hart.

A MIDSUMMER NIGHT’S DREAM. Edited by H. Cuningham.

KING HENRY V. Edited by H. A. Evans.

ALL’S WELL THAT ENDS WELL. Edited by W. O. Brigstocke.

THE TAMING OF THE SHREW. Edited by R. Warwick Bond.

TIMON OF ATHENS. Edited by K. Deighton.

MEASURE FOR MEASURE. Edited by H. C. Hart.

TWELFTH NIGHT. Edited by Moreton Luce.

THE MERCHANT OF VENICE. Edited by C. Knox Pooler.

TROILUS AND CRESSIDA. Edited by K. Deighton.

ANTONY AND CLEOPATRA. Edited by R. H. Case.

LOVE’S LABOUR’S LOST. Edited by H. C. Hart.

THE TWO GENTLEMAN OF VERONA. Edited by R. Warwick Bond.

PERICLES. Edited by K. Deighton.

THE COMEDY OF ERRORS. Edited by H. Cuningham.

KING RICHARD III. Edited by A. H. Thompson.

KING JOHN. Edited by Ivor B. John.


                         =The Beginner’s Books=
                     Edited by W. WILLIAMSON, B.A.

EASY FRENCH RHYMES. By Henri Blouet. _Second Edition._ Illustrated.
  _Fcap. 8vo._ 1_s._

EASY STORIES FROM ENGLISH HISTORY. By E. M. Wilmot-Buxton, Author of
  ‘Makers of Europe.’ _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 1_s._

EASY EXERCISES IN ARITHMETIC. Arranged by W. S. Beard. _Second Edition.
  Fcap. 8vo._ Without Answers, 1_s._ With Answers. 1_s._ 3_d._

EASY DICTATION AND SPELLING. By W. Williamson, B.A. _Fifth Edition.
  Fcap. 8vo._ 1_s._

AN EASY POETRY BOOK. Selected and arranged by W. Williamson, B.A.,
  Author of ‘Dictation Passages.’ _Cr. 8vo._ 1_s._


                          =Books on Business=
                    _Cr. 8vo._    2_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

PORTS AND DOCKS. By Douglas Owen.

RAILWAYS. By E. R. McDermott.

THE STOCK EXCHANGE. By Chas. Duguid. _Second Edition._

THE BUSINESS OF INSURANCE. By A. J. Wilson.

THE ELECTRICAL INDUSTRY: LIGHTING, TRACTION, AND POWER. By A. G. Whyte,
  B.Sc.

THE SHIPBUILDING INDUSTRY: Its History, Science, Practice, and Finance.
  By David Pollock, M.I.N.A.

THE MONEY MARKET. By F. Straker.

THE BUSINESS SIDE OF AGRICULTURE. By A. G. L. Rogers, M.A.

LAW IN BUSINESS. By H. A. Wilson. THE BREWING INDUSTRY. By Julian L.
  Baker, F.I.C., F.C.S.

THE AUTOMOBILE INDUSTRY. By G. de H. Stone.

MINING AND MINING INVESTMENTS. By ‘A. Moil.’

THE BUSINESS OF ADVERTISING. By Clarence G. Moran, Barrister-at-Law.
  Illustrated.

TRADE UNIONS. By G. Drage.

CIVIL ENGINEERING. By T. Claxton Fidler, M.Inst. C.E. Illustrated.

THE IRON TRADE OF GREAT BRITAIN. By J. Stephen Jeans. Illustrated.

MONOPOLIES, TRUSTS, AND KARTELLS. By F. W. Hirst.

THE COTTON INDUSTRY AND TRADE. By Prof. S. J. Chapman, Dean of the
  Faculty of Commerce in the University of Manchester. Illustrated.


                           =Byzantine Texts=
                  Edited by J. B. BURY, M.A., Litt.D.

A series of texts of Byzantine Historians, edited by English and foreign
scholars.

ZACHARIAH OF MITYLENE. Translated by F. J. Hamilton, D.D., and E. W.
  Brooks. _Demy 8vo._ 12_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

EVAGRIUS. Edited by Léon Parmentier and M. Bidez. _Demy 8vo._ 10_s._
  6_d._ _net_.

THE HISTORY OF PSELLUS. Edited by C. Sathas. _Demy 8vo._ 15_s._ _net_.

ECTHESIS CHRONICA. Edited by Professor Lambros. _Demy 8vo._ 7_s._ 6_d._
  _net_.

THE CHRONICLE OF MOREA. Edited by John Schmitt. _Demy 8vo._ 15_s._
  _net_.


                        =The Churchman’s Bible=
               General Editor, J. H. BURN, B.D., F.R.S.E.
                _Fcap. 8vo._    1_s._ 6_d._ _net each_.

A series of Expositions on the Books of the Bible, which will be of
service to the general reader in the practical and devotional study of
the Sacred Text.

Each Book is provided with a full and clear Introductory Section, in
which is stated what is known or conjectured respecting the date and
occasion of the composition of the Book, and any other particulars that
may help to elucidate its meaning as a whole. The Exposition is divided
into sections of a convenient length, corresponding as far as possible
with the divisions of the Church Lectionary. The Translation of the
Authorised Version is printed in full, such corrections as are deemed
necessary being placed in footnotes.

THE EPISTLE OF ST. PAUL THE APOSTLE TO THE GALATIANS. Edited by A. W.
  Robinson, M.A. _Second Edition._

ECCLESIASTES. Edited by A. W. Streane, D.D.

THE EPISTLE OF ST. PAUL THE APOSTLE TO THE PHILIPPIANS. Edited by C. R.
  D. Biggs, D.D. _Second Edition._

THE EPISTLE OF ST. JAMES. Edited by H. W. Fulford, M.A.

ISAIAH. Edited by W. E. Barnes, D.D. _Two Volumes._ With Map. 2_s._ _net
  each_.

THE EPISTLE OF ST. PAUL THE APOSTLE TO THE EPHESIANS. Edited by G. H.
  Whitaker, M.A.

THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. Edited by J. C. du Buisson, M.A. 2_s._
  6_d._ _net_.

ST. PAUL’S EPISTLES TO THE COLOSSIANS AND PHILEMON. Edited by H. J. C.
  Knight, M. A. 2_s._ _net_.


                       =The Churchman’s Library=
               General Editor, J. H. BURN, B.D., F.R.S.E.
                   _Crown 8vo._   3_s._ 6_d._ _each_.

THE BEGINNINGS OF ENGLISH CHRISTIANITY. By W. E. Collins, M.A. With Map.

SOME NEW TESTAMENT PROBLEMS. By Arthur Wright, D.D. 6_s._

THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN HERE AND HEREAFTER. By Canon Winterbotham, M.A.,
  B.Sc., LL.B.

THE WORKMANSHIP OF THE PRAYER BOOK: Its Literary and Liturgical Aspects.
  By J. Dowden, D.D. _Second Edition._

EVOLUTION. By F. B. Jevons, M.A., Litt.D.

THE OLD TESTAMENT AND THE NEW SCHOLARSHIP. By J. W. Peters, D.D. 6_s._

THE CHURCHMAN’S INTRODUCTION TO THE OLD TESTAMENT. By A. M. Mackay, B.A.

THE CHURCH OF CHRIST. By E. T. Green, M.A. 6_s._

COMPARATIVE THEOLOGY. By J. A. MacCulloch. 6_s._


                        =Classical Translations=
                       Edited by H. F. FOX, M.A.,
             Fellow and Tutor of Brasenose College, Oxford.
                              _Crown 8vo._

A series of Translations from the Greek and Latin Classics,
distinguished by literary excellence as well as by scholarly accuracy.

ÆSCHYLUS—Agamemnon, Choephoroe, Eumenides. Translated by Lewis Campbell,
  LL.D. 5_s._

CICERO—De Oratore I. Translated by E. N. P. Moor, M.A. 3_s._ 6_d._

CICERO—Select Orations (Pro Milone, Pro Mureno, Philippic II., in
  Catilinam). Translated by H. E. D. Blakiston, M.A. 5_s._

CICERO—De Natura Deorum. Translated by F. Brooks, M.A. 3_s._ 6_d._

CICERO—De Officiis. Translated by G. B. Gardiner, M.A. 2_s._ 6_d._

HORACE—The Odes and Epodes. Translated by A. D. Godley, M.A. 2_s._

LUCIAN—Six Dialogues (Nigrinus, Icaro-Menippus, The Cock, The Ship, The
  Parasite, The Lover of Falsehood). Translated by S. T. Irwin, M.A.
  3_s._ 6_d._

SOPHOCLES—Electra and Ajax. Translated by E. D. A. Morshead, M.A. 2_s._
  6_d._

TACITUS—Agricola and Germania. Translated by R. B. Townshend. 2_s._
  6_d._

THE SATIRES OF JUVENAL. Translated by S. G. Owen. 2_s._ 6_d._


                           =Classics of Art=
                      Edited by DR. J. H. W. LAING

THE ART OF THE GREEKS. By H. B. Walters. With 112 Plates and 18
  Illustrations in the Text. _Wide Royal 8vo._ 12_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

VELAZQUEZ. By A. de Beruete. With 94 Plates. _Wide Royal 8vo._ 10_s._
  6_d._ _net_.


                          =Commercial Series=
               Edited by H. DE B. GIBBINS, Litt.D., M.A.
                              _Crown 8vo._

COMMERCIAL EDUCATION IN THEORY AND PRACTICE. By E. E. Whitfield, M.A.
  5_s._

  An introduction to Methuen’s Commercial Series treating the question
  of Commercial Education fully from both the point of view of the
  teacher and of the parent.

BRITISH COMMERCE AND COLONIES FROM ELIZABETH TO VICTORIA. By H. de B.
  Gibbins, Litt.D., M.A. _Third Edition._ 2_s._

COMMERCIAL EXAMINATION PAPERS. By H. de B. Gibbins, Litt.D., M.A. 1_s._
  6_d._

THE ECONOMICS OF COMMERCE. By H. de B. Gibbins, Litt.D., M.A. _Second
  Edition._ 1_s._ 6_d._

A GERMAN COMMERCIAL READER. By S. E. Bally. With Vocabulary. 2_s._

A COMMERCIAL GEOGRAPHY OF THE BRITISH EMPIRE. By L. W. Lyde, M.A. _Fifth
  Edition._ 2_s._

A COMMERCIAL GEOGRAPHY OF FOREIGN NATIONS. By F. C. Boon, B.A. 2_s._

A PRIMER OF BUSINESS. By S. Jackson, M.A. _Third Edition._ 1_s._ 6_d._

COMMERCIAL ARITHMETIC. By F. G. Taylor, M.A. _Fourth Edition._ 1_s._
  6_d._

FRENCH COMMERCIAL CORRESPONDENCE. By S. E. Bally. With Vocabulary.
  _Third Edition._ 2_s._

GERMAN COMMERCIAL CORRESPONDENCE. By S. E. Bally. With Vocabulary.
  _Second Edition._ 2_s._ 6_d._

A FRENCH COMMERCIAL READER. By S. E. Bally. With Vocabulary. _Second
  Edition._ 2_s._

PRECIS WRITING AND OFFICE CORRESPONDENCE. By E. E. Whitfield, M.A.
  _Second Edition._ 2_s._

A GUIDE TO PROFESSIONS AND BUSINESS. By H. Jones. 1_s._ 6_d._

THE PRINCIPLES OF BOOK-KEEPING BY DOUBLE ENTRY. By J. E. B. M’Allen,
  M.A. 2_s._

COMMERCIAL LAW. By W. Douglas Edwards. _Second Edition._ 2_s._


                      =The Connoisseur’s Library=
                   _Wide Royal 8vo._    25_s._ _net_.

A sumptuous series of 20 books on art, written by experts for
collectors, superbly illustrated in photogravure, collotype, and colour.
The technical side of the art is duly treated. The first volumes are—

MEZZOTINTS. By Cyril Davenport. With 40 Plates in Photogravure.

PORCELAIN. By Edward Dillon. With 19 Plates in Colour, 20 in Collotype,
  and 5 in Photogravure.

MINIATURES. By Dudley Heath. With 9 Plates in Colour, 15 in Collotype,
  and 15 in Photogravure.

IVORIES. By A. Maskell. With 80 Plates in Collotype and Photogravure.

ENGLISH FURNITURE. By F. S. Robinson. With 160 Plates in Collotype and
  one in Photogravure. _Second Edition._

EUROPEAN ENAMELS. By Henry H. Cunynghame, C.B. With 54 Plates in
  Collotype and Half-tone and 4 Plates in Colour.

GOLDSMITHS’ AND SILVERSMITHS’ WORK. By Nelson Dawson. With many Plates
  in Collotype and a Frontispiece in Photogravure.

ENGLISH COLOURED BOOKS. By Martin Hardie. With 28 Illustrations in
  Colour and Collotype.

GLASS. By Edward Dillon. With 37 Illustrations in Collotype and 12 in
  Colour.


                       =The Library of Devotion=
            With Introductions and (where necessary) Notes.
     _Small Pott 8vo, cloth_, 2_s._; _leather_, 2_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

THE CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTINE. Edited by C. Bigg, D.D. _Fifth
  Edition._

THE CHRISTIAN YEAR. Edited by Walter Lock, D.D. _Third Edition._

THE IMITATION OF CHRIST. Edited by C. Bigg, D.D. _Fourth Edition._

A BOOK OF DEVOTIONS. Edited by J. W. Stanbridge, B.D. _Second Edition._

LYRA INNOCENTIUM. Edited by Walter Lock, D.D.

A SERIOUS CALL TO A DEVOUT AND HOLY LIFE. Edited by C. Bigg, D.D.
  _Fourth Edition._

THE TEMPLE. Edited by E. C. S. Gibson, D.D. _Second Edition._

A GUIDE TO ETERNITY. Edited by J. W. Stanbridge, B.D.

Randolph, D.D.

LYRA APOSTOLICA. By Cardinal Newman and others. Edited by Canon Scott
  Holland and Canon H. C. Beeching, M.A.

THE INNER WAY. By J. Tauler. Edited by A. W. Hutton, M.A.

THE THOUGHTS OF PASCAL. Edited by C. S. Jerram, M.A.

ON THE LOVE OF GOD. By St. Francis de Sales. Edited by W. J.
  Knox-Little, M.A.

A MANUAL OF CONSOLATION FROM THE SAINTS AND FATHERS. Edited by J. H.
  Burn, B.D.

THE SONG OF SONGS. Edited by B. Blaxland, M.A.

THE DEVOTIONS OF ST. ANSELM. Edited by C. C. J. Webb, M.A.

GRACE ABOUNDING. By John Bunyan. Edited by S. C. Freer, M.A.

BISHOP WILSON’S SACRA PRIVATA. Edited by A. E. Burn, B.D.

LYRA SACRA: A Book of Sacred Verse. Edited by H. C. Beeching, M.A.,
  Canon of Westminster.

A DAY BOOK FROM THE SAINTS AND FATHERS. Edited by J. H. Burn, B.D.

HEAVENLY WISDOM. A Selection from the English Mystics. Edited by E. C.
  Gregory.

LIGHT, LIFE, and LOVE. A Selection from the German Mystics. Edited by W.
  R. Inge, M.A.

AN INTRODUCTION TO THE DEVOUT LIFE. By St. Francis de Sales. Translated
  and Edited by T. Barns, M.A.

MANCHESTER AL MONDO: a Contemplation of Death and Immortality. By Henry
  Montagu, Earl of Manchester. With an Introduction by Elizabeth
  Waterhouse, Editor of ‘A Little Book of Life and Death.’

THE LITTLE FLOWERS OF THE GLORIOUS MESSER ST. FRANCIS AND OF HIS FRIARS.
  Done into English by W. Heywood. With an Introduction by A. G. Ferrers
  Howell.

THE SPIRITUAL GUIDE, which disentangles the Soul and brings it by the
  Inward Way to the Getting of Perfect Contemplation and the Rich
  Treasure of Internal Peace. Written by Dr. Michael de Molinos, Priest.
  Translated from the Italian copy printed at Venice, 1685. Printed in
  the year MDCLXXXVIII. Edited by the Hon. Mrs. Arthur Lyttelton.


      =The Illustrated Pocket Library of Plain and Coloured Books=
             _Fcap 8vo._    3_s._ 6_d._ _net each volume_.

A series, in small form, of some of the famous illustrated books of
fiction and general literature. These are faithfully reprinted from the
first or best editions without introduction or notes. The Illustrations
are chiefly in colour.


                             COLOURED BOOKS

OLD COLOURED BOOKS. By George Paston. With 16 Coloured Plates. _Fcap.
  8vo._ 2_s._ _net_.

THE LIFE AND DEATH OF JOHN MYTTON, ESQ. By Nimrod. With 18 Coloured
  Plates by Henry Alken and T. J. Rawlins. _Fourth Edition._

THE LIFE OF A SPORTSMAN. By Nimrod. With 35 Coloured Plates by Henry
  Alken.

HANDLEY CROSS. By R. S. Surtees. With 17 Coloured Plates and 100
  Woodcuts in the Text by John Leech. _Second Edition._

MR. SPONGE’S SPORTING TOUR. By R. S. Surtees. With 13 Coloured Plates
  and 90 Woodcuts in the Text by John Leech.

JORROCKS’ JAUNTS AND JOLLITIES. By R. S. Surtees. With 15 Coloured
  Plates by H. Alken. _Second Edition._

  This volume is reprinted from the extremely rare and costly edition of
  1843, which contains Alken’s very fine illustrations instead of the
  usual ones by Phiz.

ASK MAMMA. By R. S. Surtees. With 13 Coloured Plates and 70 Woodcuts in
  the Text by John Leech.

THE ANALYSIS OF THE HUNTING FIELD. By R. S. Surtees. With 7 Coloured
  Plates by Henry Alken, and 43 Illustrations on Wood.

THE TOUR OF DR. SYNTAX IN SEARCH OF THE PICTURESQUE. By William Combe.
  With 30 Coloured Plates by T. Rowlandson.

THE TOUR OF DOCTOR SYNTAX IN SEARCH OF CONSOLATION. By William Combe.
  With 24 Coloured Plates by T. Rowlandson.

THE THIRD TOUR OF DOCTOR SYNTAX IN SEARCH OF A WIFE. By William Combe.
  With 24 Coloured Plates by T. Rowlandson.

THE HISTORY OF JOHNNY QUAE GENUS: the Little Foundling of the late Dr.
  Syntax. By the Author of ‘The Three Tours.’ With 24 Coloured Plates by
  Rowlandson.

THE ENGLISH DANCE OF DEATH, from the Designs of T. Rowlandson, with
  Metrical Illustrations by the Author of ‘Doctor Syntax.’ _Two
  Volumes._

  This book contains 76 Coloured Plates.

THE DANCE OF LIFE: A Poem. By the Author of ‘Doctor Syntax.’ Illustrated
  with 26 Coloured Engravings by T. Rowlandson.

LIFE IN LONDON: or, the Day and Night Scenes of Jerry Hawthorn, Esq.,
  and his Elegant Friend, Corinthian Tom. By Pierce Egan. With 36
  Coloured Plates by I. R. and G. Cruikshank. With numerous Designs on
  Wood.

REAL LIFE IN LONDON: or, the Rambles and Adventures of Bob Tallyho,
  Esq., and his Cousin, The Hon. Tom Dashall. By an Amateur (Pierce
  Egan). With 31 Coloured Plates by Alken and Rowlandson, etc. _Two
  Volumes._

THE LIFE OF AN ACTOR. By Pierce Egan. With 27 Coloured Plates by
  Theodore Lane, and several Designs on Wood.

THE VICAR OF WAKEFIELD. By Oliver Goldsmith. With 24 Coloured Plates by
  T. Rowlandson.

THE MILITARY ADVENTURES OF JOHNNY NEWCOME. By an Officer. With 15
  Coloured Plates by T. Rowlandson.

THE NATIONAL SPORTS OF GREAT BRITAIN. With Descriptions and 51 Coloured
  Plates by Henry Alken.

  This book is completely different from the large folio edition of
  ‘National Sports’ by the same artist, and none of the plates are
  similar.

THE ADVENTURES OF A POST CAPTAIN. By A Naval Officer. With 24 Coloured
  Plates by Mr. Williams.

GAMONIA: or, the Art of Preserving Game; and an Improved Method of
  making Plantations and Covers, explained and illustrated by Lawrence
  Rawstorne, Esq. With 15 Coloured Plates by T. Rawlins.

AN ACADEMY FOR GROWN HORSEMEN: Containing the completest Instructions
  for Walking, Trotting, Cantering, Galloping, Stumbling, and Tumbling.
  Illustrated with 27 Coloured Plates, and adorned with a Portrait of
  the Author. By Geoffrey Gambado, Esq.

REAL LIFE IN IRELAND, or, the Day and Night Scenes of Brian Boru, Esq.,
  and his Elegant Friend, Sir Shawn O’Dogherty. By a Real Paddy. With 19
  Coloured Plates by Heath, Marks, etc.

THE ADVENTURES OF JOHNNY NEWCOME IN THE NAVY. By Alfred Burton. With 16
  Coloured Plates by T. Rowlandson.

THE OLD ENGLISH SQUIRE: A Poem. By John Careless, Esq. With 20 Coloured
  Plates after the style of T. Rowlandson.


                             _PLAIN BOOKS_

THE GRAVE: A Poem. By Robert Blair. Illustrated by 12 Etchings executed
  by Louis Schiavonetti from the original Inventions of William Blake.
  With an Engraved Title Page and a Portrait of Blake by T. Phillips,
  R.A.

  The illustrations are reproduced in photogravure.

ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE BOOK OF JOB. Invented and engraved by William
  Blake.

  These famous Illustrations—21 in number—are reproduced in
  photogravure.

ÆSOP’S FABLES. With 380 Woodcuts by Thomas Bewick.

WINDSOR CASTLE. By W. Harrison Ainsworth. With 22 Plates and 87 Woodcuts
  in the Text by George Cruikshank.

THE TOWER OF LONDON. By W. Harrison Ainsworth. With 40 Plates and 58
  Woodcuts in the Text by George Cruikshank.

FRANK FAIRLEGH. By F. E. Smedley. With 30 Plates by George Cruikshank.

  HANDY ANDY. By Samuel Lover. With 24 Illustrations by the Author.

THE COMPLEAT ANGLER. By Izaak Walton and Charles Cotton. With 14 Plates
  and 77 Woodcuts in the Text.

  This volume is reproduced from the beautiful edition of John Major of
  1824.

THE PICKWICK PAPERS. By Charles Dickens. With the 43 Illustrations by
  Seymour and Phiz, the two Buss Plates, and the 32 Contemporary Onwhyn
  Plates.


                      =Junior Examination Series=
        Edited by A. M. M. STEDMAN, M.A.   _Fcap. 8vo._   1_s._

JUNIOR FRENCH EXAMINATION PAPERS. By F. Jacob, M.A. _Second Edition._

JUNIOR LATIN EXAMINATION PAPERS. By C. G. Botting, B.A. _Fourth
  Edition._

JUNIOR ENGLISH EXAMINATION PAPERS. By W. Williamson, B.A.

JUNIOR ARITHMETIC EXAMINATION PAPERS. By W. S. Beard. _Third Edition._

JUNIOR ALGEBRA EXAMINATION PAPERS. By S. W. Finn, M.A.

JUNIOR GREEK EXAMINATION PAPERS. By T. C. Weatherhead, M.A.

JUNIOR GENERAL INFORMATION EXAMINATION PAPERS. By W. S. Beard.

A KEY TO THE ABOVE. 3_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

JUNIOR GEOGRAPHY EXAMINATION PAPERS. By W. G. Baker, M.A.

JUNIOR GERMAN EXAMINATION PAPERS. By A. Voegelin, M.A.


                         =Junior School-Books=
         Edited by O. D. INSKIP, LL.D., and W. WILLIAMSON, B.A.

A CLASS-BOOK OF DICTATION PASSAGES. By W. Williamson, B.A. _Twelfth
  Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 1_s._ 6_d._

THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW. Edited by E. Wilton South, M.A.
  With Three Maps. _Cr. 8vo._ 1_s._ 6_d._

THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. Edited by A. E. Rubie, D.D. With Three
  Maps. _Cr. 8vo._ 1_s._ 6_d._

A JUNIOR ENGLISH GRAMMAR. By W. Williamson, B.A. With numerous passages
  for parsing and analysis, and a chapter on Essay Writing. _Third
  Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 2_s._

A JUNIOR CHEMISTRY. By E. A. Tyler, B.A., F.C.S. With 78 Illustrations.
  _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 2_s._ 6_d._

THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. Edited by A. E. Rubie, D.D. _Cr. 8vo._ 2_s._

A JUNIOR FRENCH GRAMMAR. By L. A. Sornet and M. J. Acatos. _Cr. 8vo._
  2_s._

ELEMENTARY EXPERIMENTAL SCIENCE. PHYSICS by W. T. Clough, A.R.C.S.
  CHEMISTRY by A. E. Dunstan, B.Sc. With 2 Plates and 154 Diagrams.
  _Fourth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 2_s._ 6_d._

A JUNIOR GEOMETRY. By Noel S. Lydon. With 276 Diagrams. _Fourth Edition.
  Cr. 8vo._ 2_s._

ELEMENTARY EXPERIMENTAL CHEMISTRY. By A. E. Dunstan, B.Sc. With 4 Plates
  and 109 Diagrams. _Cr. 8vo._ 2_s._

A JUNIOR FRENCH PROSE. By R. R. N. Baron, M.A. _Second Edition. Cr.
  8vo._ 2_s._

THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. With an Introduction and Notes by
  William Williamson, B.A. With Three Maps. _Cr. 8vo._ 2_s._

THE FIRST BOOK OF KINGS. Edited by A. E. Rubie, D.D. With Maps. _Cr.
  8vo._ 2_s._


                         =Leaders of Religion=
         Edited by H. C. BEECHING, M.A., Canon of Westminster.
            _With Portraits._    _Cr. 8vo.    _ 2_s._ _net_.

  CARDINAL NEWMAN. By R. H. Hutton.

  JOHN WESLEY. By J. H. Overton, M.A.

  BISHOP WILBERFORCE. By G. W. Daniell, M.A.

  CARDINAL MANNING. By A. W. Hutton, M.A.

  CHARLES SIMEON. By H. C. G. Moule, D.D.

  JOHN KEBLE. By Walter Lock, D.D.

  THOMAS CHALMERS. By Mrs. Oliphant.

  LANCELOT ANDREWES. By R. L. Ottley, D.D. _Second Edition._

  AUGUSTINE OF CANTERBURY. By E. L. Cutts, D.D.

  WILLIAM LAUD. By W. H. Hutton, M.A. _Third Edition._

  JOHN KNOX. By F. MacCunn. _Second Edition._

  JOHN HOWE. By R. F. Horton, D.D.

  BISHOP KEN. By F. A. Clarke, M.A.

  GEORGE FOX, THE QUAKER. By T. Hodgkin, D.C.L. _Third Edition._

  JOHN DONNE. By Augustus Jessopp, D.D.

  THOMAS CRANMER. By A. J. Mason, D.D.

  BISHOP LATIMER. By R. M. Carlyle and A. J. Carlyle, M.A.

  BISHOP BUTLER. By W. A. Spooner, M.A.


                        =The Little Blue Books=
              _Illustrated.    Demy 16mo._    2_s._ 6_d._

  1. THE CASTAWAYS OF MEADOWBANK. By Thomas Cobb.

  2. THE BEECHNUT BOOK. By Jacob Abbott. Edited by E. V. Lucas.

  3. THE AIR GUN. By T. Hilbert.

  4. A SCHOOL YEAR. By Netta Syrett.

  5. THE PEELES AT THE CAPITAL. By Roger Ashton.

  6. THE TREASURE OF PRINCEGATE PRIORY. By T. Cobb.

  7. MRS. BARBERRY’S GENERAL SHOP. By Roger Ashton.

  8. A BOOK OF BAD CHILDREN. By W. T. Webb.

  9. THE LOST BALL. By Thomas Cobb.


                         =Little Books on Art=
    _With many Illustrations._    _Demy 16mo._    2_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

A series of monographs in miniature, containing the complete outline of
the subject under treatment and rejecting minute details. These books
are produced with the greatest care. Each volume consists of about 200
pages, and contains from 30 to 40 illustrations, including a
frontispiece in photogravure.

  GREEK ART. H. B. Walters. _Third Edition._

  BOOKPLATES. E. Almack.

  REYNOLDS. J. Sime. _Second Edition._

  ROMNEY. George Paston.

  WATTS. R. E. D. Sketchley.

  LEIGHTON. Alice Corkran.

  VELASQUEZ. Wilfrid Wilberforce and A. R. Gilbert.

  GREUZE AND BOUCHER. Eliza F. Pollard.

  VANDYCK. M. G. Smallwood.

  TURNER. Frances Tyrrell-Gill.

  DÜRER. Jessie Allen.

  HOPPNER. H. P. K. Skipton.

  HOLBEIN. Mrs. G. Fortescue.

  BURNE-JONES. Fortunée de Lisle. _Second Edition._

  REMBRANDT. Mrs. E. A. Sharp.

  COROT. Alice Pollard and Ethel Birnstingl.

  RAPHAEL. A. R. Dryhurst.

  MILLET. Netta Peacock.

  ILLUMINATED MSS. J. W. Bradley.

  CHRIST IN ART. Mrs. Henry Jenner.

  JEWELLERY. Cyril Davenport.

  CLAUDE. Edward Dillon.

  THE ARTS OF JAPAN. Edward Dillon.

  ENAMELS. Mrs. Nelson Dawson.


                         =The Little Galleries=
                   _Demy 16mo._    2_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

A series of little books containing examples of the best work of the
great painters. Each volume contains 20 plates in photogravure, together
with a short outline of the life and work of the master to whom the book
is devoted.

  A LITTLE GALLERY OF REYNOLDS.

  A LITTLE GALLERY OF ROMNEY.

  A LITTLE GALLERY OF HOPPNER.

  A LITTLE GALLERY OF MILLAIS.

  A LITTLE GALLERY OF ENGLISH PORTS.


                          =The Little Guides=
        With many Illustrations by E. H. NEW and other artists,
                         and from photographs.
              _Small Pott 8vo, cloth_, 2_s._ 6_d._ _net_.;
                     _leather_, 3_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

Messrs. METHUEN are publishing a small series of books under the general
title of THE LITTLE GUIDES. The main features of these books are (1) a
handy and charming form, (2) artistic Illustrations by E. H. NEW and
others, (3) good plans and maps, (4) an adequate but compact
presentation of everything that is interesting in the natural features,
history, archæology, and architecture of the town or district treated.

CAMBRIDGE AND ITS COLLEGES. By A. Hamilton Thompson. _Second Edition._

OXFORD AND ITS COLLEGES. By J. Wells, M.A. _Seventh Edition._

ST. PAUL’S CATHEDRAL. By George Clinch.

WESTMINSTER ABBEY. By G. E. Troutbeck.

                         ---------------------

THE ENGLISH LAKES. By F. G. Brabant, M.A.

THE MALVERN COUNTRY. By B. C. A. Windle, D.Sc., F.R.S.

SHAKESPEARE’S COUNTRY. By B. C. A. Windle, D.Sc., F.R.S. _Second
  Edition._

                         ---------------------

BUCKINGHAMSHIRE. By E. S. Roscoe.

CHESHIRE. By W. M. Gallichan.

CORNWALL. By A. L. Salmon.

DERBYSHIRE. By J. Charles Cox, LL.D., F.S.A.

DEVON. By S. Baring-Gould.

DORSET. By Frank R. Heath.

HAMPSHIRE. By J. Charles Cox, LL.D., F.S.A.

HERTFORDSHIRE. By H. W. Tompkins, F.R.H.S.

THE ISLE OF WIGHT. By G. Clinch.

KENT. By G. Clinch.

KERRY. By C. P. Crane.

MIDDLESEX. By John B. Firth.

NORTHAMPTONSHIRE. By Wakeling Dry.

NORFOLK. By W. A. Dutt.

OXFORDSHIRE. By F. G. Brabant, M.A.

SUFFOLK. By W. A. Dutt.

SURREY. By F. A. H. Lambert.

SUSSEX. By F. G. Brabant, M.A. _Second Edition._

THE EAST RIDING OF YORKSHIRE. By J. E. Morris.

THE NORTH RIDING OF YORKSHIRE. By J. E. Morris.

                         ---------------------

BRITTANY. By S. Baring-Gould.

NORMANDY. By C. Scudamore.

ROME. By C. G. Ellaby.

SICILY. By F. Hamilton Jackson.


                          =The Little Library=
       With Introductions, Notes, and Photogravure Frontispieces.
        _Small Pott 8vo. Each Volume, cloth_, 1_s._ 6_d._ _net;
                      leather_, 2_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

=Anon.= ENGLISH LYRICS, A LITTLE BOOK OF.

=Austen (Jane).= PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. Edited by E. V. Lucas. _Two Vols._

  NORTHANGER ABBEY. Edited by E. V. Lucas.

=Bacon (Francis).= THE ESSAYS OF LORD BACON. Edited by EDWARD WRIGHT.

=Barham (R. H.).= THE INGOLDSBY LEGENDS. Edited by J. B. ATLAY. _Two
  Volumes._

=Barnett (Mrs. P. A.).= A LITTLE BOOK OF ENGLISH PROSE.

=Beckford (William).= THE HISTORY OF THE CALIPH VATHEK. Edited by E.
  DENISON ROSS.

=Blake (William).= SELECTIONS FROM WILLIAM BLAKE. Edited by M. PERUGINI.

=Borrow (George).= LAVENGRO. Edited by F. HINDES GROOME. _Two Volumes._

  THE ROMANY RYE. Edited by JOHN SAMPSON.

=Browning (Robert).= SELECTIONS FROM THE EARLY POEMS OF ROBERT BROWNING.
  Edited by W. HALL GRIFFIN, M.A.

=Canning (George).= SELECTIONS FROM THE ANTI-JACOBIN: with GEORGE
  CANNING‘s additional Poems. Edited by LLOYD SANDERS.

=Cowley (Abraham).= THE ESSAYS OF ABRAHAM COWLEY. Edited by H. C.
  MINCHIN.

=Crabbe (George).= SELECTIONS FROM GEORGE CRABBE. Edited by A. C. DEANE.

=Craik (Mrs.).= JOHN HALIFAX, GENTLEMAN. Edited by ANNE MATHESON. _Two
  Volumes._

=Crashaw (Richard).= THE ENGLISH POEMS OF RICHARD CRASHAW. Edited by
  EDWARD HUTTON.

=Dante (Alighieri).= THE INFERNO OF DANTE. Translated by H. F. CARY.
  Edited by PAGET TOYNBEE, M.A., D.Litt.

  THE PURGATORIO OF DANTE. Translated by H. F. CARY. Edited by PAGET
  TOYNBEE, M.A., D.Litt.

  THE PARADISO OF DANTE. Translated by H. F. CARY. Edited by PAGET
  TOYNBEE, M.A., D.Litt.

=Darley (George).= SELECTIONS FROM THE POEMS OF GEORGE DARLEY. Edited by
  R. A. STREATFEILD.

=Deane (A. C.).= A LITTLE BOOK OF LIGHT VERSE.

=Dickens (Charles).= CHRISTMAS BOOKS. _Two Volumes._

=Ferrier (Susan).= MARRIAGE. Edited by A. GOODRICH-FREER and LORD
  IDDESLEIGH. _Two Volumes._

THE INHERITANCE. _Two Volumes._

=Gaskell (Mrs.).= CRANFORD. Edited by E. V. LUCAS. _Second Edition._

=Hawthorne (Nathaniel).= THE SCARLET LETTER. Edited by PERCY DEARMER.

=Henderson (T. F.).= A LITTLE BOOK OF SCOTTISH VERSE.

=Keats (John).= POEMS. With an Introduction by L. BINYON, and Notes by
  J. MASEFIELD.

=Kinglake (A. W.).= EOTHEN. With an Introduction and Notes. _Second
  Edition._

=Lamb (Charles).= ELIA, AND THE LAST ESSAYS OF ELIA. Edited by E. V.
  LUCAS.

=Locker (F.).= LONDON LYRICS. Edited by A. D. GODLEY, M.A. A reprint of
  the First Edition.

=Longfellow (H. W.).= SELECTIONS FROM LONGFELLOW. Edited by L. M.
  FAITHFULL.

=Marvell (Andrew).= THE POEMS OF ANDREW MARVELL. Edited by E. WRIGHT.

=Milton (John).= THE MINOR POEMS OF JOHN MILTON. Edited by H. C.
  BEECHING, M.A., Canon of Westminster.

  =Moir (D. M.).= MANSIE WAUCH. Edited by T. F. HENDERSON.

=Nichols (J. B. B.).= A LITTLE BOOK OF ENGLISH SONNETS.

=Rochefoucauld(La).= THE MAXIMS OF LA ROCHEFOUCAULD. Translated by Dean
  STANHOPE. Edited by G. H. POWELL.

=Smith (Horace and James).= REJECTED ADDRESSES. Edited by A. D. GODLEY,
  M.A.

=Sterne (Laurence).= A SENTIMENTAL JOURNEY. Edited by H. W. PAUL.

=Tennyson (Alfred, Lord).= THE EARLY POEMS OF ALFRED, LORD TENNYSON.
  Edited by J. CHURTON COLLINS, M.A.

  IN MEMORIAM. Edited by H. C. BEECHING, M.A.

  THE PRINCESS. Edited by ELIZABETH WORDSWORTH.

  MAUD. Edited by ELIZABETH WORDSWORTH.

=Thackeray (W. M.).= VANITY FAIR. Edited by S. GWYNN. _Three Volumes._

  PENDENNIS. Edited by S. GWYNN. _Three Volumes._

  ESMOND. Edited by S. GWYNN.

  CHRISTMAS BOOKS. Edited by S. GWYNN.

=Vaughan (Henry).= THE POEMS OF HENRY VAUGHAN. Edited by EDWARD HUTTON.

=Walton (Izaak).= THE COMPLEAT ANGLER. Edited by J. BUCHAN.

=Waterhouse (Mrs. Alfred).= A LITTLE BOOK OF LIFE AND DEATH. Edited by.
  _Ninth Edition._

        Also on Japanese Paper. _Leather._ 5_s._ _net_.

=Wordsworth (W.).= SELECTIONS FROM WORDSWORTH. Edited by NOWELL C.
  SMITH.

=Wordsworth (W.)= and =Coleridge (S. T.)=. LYRICAL BALLADS. Edited by
  GEORGE SAMPSON.


                    =The Little Quarto Shakespeare=
          Edited by W. J. CRAIG. With Introductions and Notes.

  _Pott 16mo. In 40 Volumes. Leather, price_ 1_s._ _net each volume_.
             _Mahogany Revolving Book Case._ 10_s._ _net_.


                          =Miniature Library=
            Reprints in miniature of a few interesting books
    which have qualities of humanity, devotion, or literary genius.

EUPHRANOR: A Dialogue on Youth. By Edward FitzGerald. From the edition
  published by W. Pickering in 1851. _Demy 32mo. Leather_, 2_s._ _net_.

POLONIUS: or Wise Saws and Modern Instances. By Edward FitzGerald. From
  the edition published by W. Pickering in 1852. _Demy 32mo. Leather_,
  2_s._ _net_.

THE RUBÁIYÁT OF OMAR KHAYYÁM. By Edward FitzGerald. From the 1st edition
  of 1859, _Third Edition. Leather_, 1_s._ _net_.

THE LIFE OF EDWARD, LORD HERBERT OF CHERBURY. Written by himself. From
  the edition printed at Strawberry Hill in the year 1764. _Medium 32mo.
  Leather_, 2_s._ _net_.

THE VISIONS OF DOM FRANCISCO QUEVEDO VILLEGAS, Knight of the Order of
  St. James. Made English by R. L. From the edition printed for H.
  Herringman, 1668. _Leather_, 2_s._ _net_.

POEMS. By Dora Greenwell. From the edition of 1848. _Leather_, 2_s._
  _net_.


                          =Oxford Biographies=
        _Fcap. 8vo.    Each volume, cloth_, 2_s._ 6_d._   _net_;
                     _leather_, 3_s._ 6_d._ _net_.

DANTE ALIGHIERI. By Paget Toynbee, M.A., D.Litt. With 12 Illustrations.
  _Second Edition._

SAVONAROLA. By E. L. S. Horsburgh, M.A. With 12 Illustrations. _Second
  Edition._

JOHN HOWARD. By E. C. S. Gibson, D.D., Bishop of Gloucester. With 12
  Illustrations.

TENNYSON. By A. C. BENSON, M.A. With 9 Illustrations.

WALTER RALEIGH. By I. A. Taylor. With 12 Illustrations.

ERASMUS. By E. F. H. Capey. With 12 Illustrations.

THE YOUNG PRETENDER. By C. S. Terry. With 12 Illustrations.

ROBERT BURNS. By T. F. Henderson. With 12 Illustrations.

CHATHAM. By A. S. M’Dowall. With 12 Illustrations.

ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI. By Anna M. Stoddart. With 16 Illustrations.

CANNING. By W. Alison Phillips. With 12 Illustrations.

BEACONSFIELD. By Walter Sichel. With 12 Illustrations.

GOETHE. By H. G. Atkins. With 12 Illustrations.

FENELON. By Viscount St Cyres. With 12 Illustrations.


                      =School Examination Series=
       Edited by A. M. M. STEDMAN, M.A.    _Cr. 8vo._ 2_s._ 6_d._

FRENCH EXAMINATION PAPERS. By A. M. M. Stedman, M.A. _Fourteenth
  Edition._

    A KEY, issued to Tutors and Private Students only to be had on
      application to the Publishers. _Fifth Edition._ _Crown 8vo._ 6_s._
      _net_.

LATIN EXAMINATION PAPERS. By A. M. M. Stedman, M.A. _Thirteenth
  Edition._

    KEY (_Sixth Edition_) issued as above. 6_s._ _net_.

GREEK EXAMINATION PAPERS. By A. M. M. Stedman, M.A. _Ninth Edition._

    KEY (_Third Edition_) issued as above. 6_s._ _net_.

GERMAN EXAMINATION PAPERS. By R. J. Morich. _Sixth Edition._

    KEY (_Third Edition_) issued as above. 6_s._ _net_.

HISTORY AND GEOGRAPHY EXAMINATION PAPERS. By C. H. Spence, M.A. _Second
  Edition._

PHYSICS EXAMINATION PAPERS. By R. E. Steel, M.A., F.C.S.

GENERAL KNOWLEDGE EXAMINATION PAPERS. By A. M. M. Stedman, M.A. _Sixth
  Edition._

    KEY (_Fourth Edition_) issued as above. 7_s._ _net_.

EXAMINATION PAPERS IN ENGLISH HISTORY. By J. Tait Plowden-Wardlaw, B.A.


                           =School Histories=
                 _Illustrated. Crown 8vo._ 1_s._ 6_d._

A SCHOOL HISTORY OF WARWICKSHIRE. By B. C. A. Windle, D.Sc., F.R.S.

A SCHOOL HISTORY OF SOMERSET. By Walter Raymond.

A SCHOOL HISTORY OF LANCASHIRE. By W. E. Rhodes.

A SCHOOL HISTORY OF SURREY. By H. E. Malden, M.A.

A SCHOOL HISTORY OF MIDDLESEX. By V. G. Plarr and F. W. Walton.


                         =Textbooks of Science=
     Edited by G. F. GOODCHILD, M.A., B.Sc., and G. R. MILLS, M.A.

PRACTICAL MECHANICS. By Sidney H. Wells. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._
  6_d._

PRACTICAL PHYSICS. By H. Stroud, D.Sc., M.A. _Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._

PRACTICAL CHEMISTRY. Part I. By W. French, M.A. _Cr. 8vo. Fourth
  Edition._ 1_s._ 6_d._ Part II. By W. French, M.A., and T. H. Boardman,
  M.A. _Cr. 8vo._ 1_s._ 6_d._

TECHNICAL ARITHMETIC AND GEOMETRY. By C. T. Millis, M.I.M.E. _Cr. 8vo._
  3_s._ 6_d._

EXAMPLES IN PHYSICS. By C. E. Jackson, B.A. _Cr. 8vo._ 2_s._ 6_d._

PLANT LIFE, Studies in Garden and School. By Horace F. Jones, F.C.S.
  With 320 Diagrams. _Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._

THE COMPLETE SCHOOL CHEMISTRY. By F. Oldham, B.A. Illustrated. _Cr.
  8vo._

AN ORGANIC CHEMISTRY FOR SCHOOLS AND TECHNICAL INSTITUTES. By A. E.
  Dunstan, B.Sc. (Lond.), F.C.S. Illustrated. _Cr. 8vo._

ELEMENTARY SCIENCE FOR PUPIL TEACHERS. PHYSICS SECTION. By W. T. Clough,
  A.R.C.S. (Lond.), F.C.S. CHEMISTRY SECTION. By A. E. Dunstan, B.Sc.
  (Lond.), F.C.S. With 2 Plates and 10 Diagrams. _Cr. 8vo._ 2_s._


                  =Methuen’s Simplified French Texts=
                    Edited by T. R. N. CROFTS, M.A.
                          _One Shilling each._

L’HISTOIRE D’UNE TULIPE. Adapted by T. R. N. Crofts, M.A.

ABDALLAH. Adapted by J. A. Wilson.

LA CHANSON DE ROLAND. Adapted by H. Rieu, M.A.

MÉMOIRES DE CADICHON. Adapted by J. F. Rhoades.


                      =Methuen’s Standard Library=
                         _In Sixpenny Volumes._

      THE STANDARD LIBRARY is a new series of volumes containing the
      great classics of the world, and particularly the finest works of
      English literature. All the great masters will be represented,
      either in complete works or in selections. It is the ambition of
      the publishers to place the best books of the Anglo-Saxon race
      within the reach of every reader, so that the series may represent
      something of the diversity and splendour of our English tongue.
      The characteristics of THE STANDARD LIBRARY are four:—1. SOUNDNESS
      OF TEXT. 2. CHEAPNESS. 3. CLEARNESS OF TYPE. 4. SIMPLICITY. The
      books are well printed on good paper at a price which on the whole
      is without parallel in the history of publishing. Each volume
      contains from 100 to 250 pages, and is issued in paper covers,
      Crown 8vo, at Sixpence net, or in cloth gilt at One Shilling net.
      In a few cases long books are issued as Double Volumes or as
      Treble Volumes.

      The following books are ready with the exception of those marked
      with a †, which denotes that the book is nearly ready:—

THE MEDITATIONS OF MARCUS AURELIUS. The translation is by R. Graves.

THE NOVELS OF JANE AUSTEN. In 5 volumes.

VOL. 1.—Sense and Sensibility.

ESSAYS AND COUNSELS and THE NEW ATLANTIS. By Francis Bacon, Lord
  Verulam.

RELIGIO MEDICI and URN BURIAL. By Sir Thomas Browne. The text has been
  collated by A. R. Waller.

THE PILGRIM’S PROGRESS. By John Bunyan.

REFLECTIONS ON THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. By Edmund Burke.

THE POEMS AND SONGS OF ROBERT BURNS. Double Volume.

THE ANALOGY OF RELIGION, NATURAL AND REVEALED. By Joseph Butler, D.D.

THE POEMS OF THOMAS CHATTERTON. In 2 volumes.

  VOL. I.—Miscellaneous Poems.

  †VOL.II.—The Rowley Poems.

†THE NEW LIFE AND SONNETS. By Dante. Translated into English by D. G.
  Rossetti.

TOM JONES. By Henry Fielding. Treble Vol.

  CRANFORD. By Mrs. Gaskell.

THE HISTORY OF THE DECLINE AND FALL OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. By Edward
  Gibbon. In 7 double volumes.

  The Text and Notes have been revised by J. B. Bury, Litt.D., but the
  Appendices of the more expensive edition are not given.

†THE VICAR OF WAKEFIELD. By Oliver Goldsmith.

THE POEMS AND PLAYS OF OLIVER GOLDSMITH.

THE WORKS OF BEN JONSON.

  VOL. I.—The Case is Altered. Every Man in His Humour. Every Man out of
    His Humour.

  VOL. II.—Cynthia’s Revels; The Poetaster. The text has been collated
    by H. C. Hart.

THE POEMS OF JOHN KEATS. Double volume. The Text has been collated by E.
  de Selincourt.

ON THE IMITATION OF CHRIST. By Thomas à Kempis.

  The translation is by C. Bigg, D.D., Canon of Christ Church.

A SERIOUS CALL TO A DEVOUT AND HOLY LIFE. By William Law.

THE POEMS OF JOHN MILTON. In 2 volumes.

  VOL. I.—Paradise Lost.

THE PROSE WORKS OF JOHN MILTON.

  VOL. I.—Eikonoklastes and The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates.

SELECT WORKS OF SIR THOMAS MORE.

  VOL. I.—Utopia and Poems.

THE REPUBLIC OF PLATO. Translated by Sydenham and Taylor. Double Volume.
  The translation has been revised by W. H. D. Rouse.

THE LITTLE FLOWERS OF ST. FRANCIS. Translated by W. Heywood.

THE WORKS OF WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE. In 10 volumes.

  VOL. I.—The Tempest; The Two Gentlemen of Verona; The Merry Wives of
    Windsor; Measure for Measure; The Comedy of Errors.

  VOL. II.—Much Ado About Nothing; Love’s Labour’s Lost; A Midsummer
    Night’s Dream; The Merchant of Venice; As You Like It.

  VOL. III.—The Taming of the Shrew; All’s Well that Ends Well; Twelfth
    Night; The Winter’s Tale.

  VOL. IV.—The Life and Death of King John; The Tragedy of King Richard
    the Second; The First Part of King Henry IV.; The Second Part of
    King Henry IV.

  VOL.V.—The Life of King Henry V.; The First Part of King Henry VI.;
    The Second Part of King Henry VI.

  VOL. VI.—The Third Part of King Henry VI.; The Tragedy of King Richard
    III.; The Famous History of the Life of King Henry VIII.

THE POEMS OF PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY. In 4 volumes.

  Vol. I.—Alastor; The Dæmon of the World; The Revolt of Islam, etc.

  The Text has been revised by C. D. Locock.

THE LIFE OF NELSON. By Robert Southey.

THE NATURAL HISTORY AND ANTIQUITIES OF SELBORNE. By Gilbert White.


                       =Textbooks of Technology=
     Edited by G. F. GOODCHILD, M.A., B.Sc., and G. R. MILLS, M.A.
                          _Fully Illustrated._

HOW TO MAKE A DRESS. By J. A. E. Wood. _Fourth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 1_s._
  6_d._

CARPENTRY AND JOINERY. By F. C. Webber. _Fifth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._
  6_d._

MILLINERY, THEORETICAL AND PRACTICAL. By Clare Hill. _Third Edition. Cr.
  8vo._ 2_s._

AN INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY OF TEXTILE DESIGN. By Aldred F. Barker.
  _Demy 8vo._ 7_s._ 6_d._

BUILDERS’ QUANTITIES. By H. C. Grubb. _Cr. 8vo._ 4_s._ 6_d._

RÉPOUSSÉ METAL WORK. By A. C. Horth. _Cr. 8vo._ 2_s._ 6_d._

ELECTRIC LIGHT AND POWER: An Introduction to the Study of Electrical
  Engineering. By E. E. Brooks, B.Sc. (Lond.), Second Master and
  Instructor of Physics and Electrical Engineering, Leicester Technical
  School, and W. H. N. James, A.R.C.S., A.I.E.E., Assistant Instructor
  of Electrical Engineering, Manchester Municipal Technical School. _Cr.
  8vo._ 4_s._ 6_d._

ENGINEERING WORKSHOP PRACTICE. By C. C. Allen, Lecturer on Engineering,
  Municipal Technical Institute, Coventry. With many Diagrams. _Cr.
  8vo._ 2_s._


                        =Handbooks of Theology=
Edited by R. L. OTTLEY, D.D., Professor of Pastoral Theology at Oxford,
                  and Canon of Christ Church, Oxford.

The series is intended, in part, to furnish the clergy and teachers or
students of Theology with trustworthy Textbooks, adequately representing
the present position

of the questions dealt with; in part, to make accessible to the reading
public an accurate and concise statement of facts and principles in all
questions bearing on Theology and Religion.

THE XXXIX. ARTICLES OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND. Edited by E. C. S. Gibson,
  D.D. _Fifth and Cheaper Edition in one Volume. Demy 8vo._ 12_s._ 6_d._

AN INTRODUCTION TO THE HISTORY OF RELIGION. By F. B. Jevons, M.A.,
  Litt.D. _Third Edition. Demy 8vo._ 10_s._ 6_d._

THE DOCTRINE OF THE INCARNATION. By R. L. Ottley, D.D. _Second and
  Cheaper Edition. Demy 8vo._ 12_s._ 6_d._

AN INTRODUCTION TO THE HISTORY OF THE CREEDS. By A. E. Burn, D.D. _Demy
  8vo._ 10_s._ 6_d._

THE PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION IN ENGLAND AND AMERICA. By Alfred Caldecott,
  D.D. _Demy 8vo._ 10_s._ 6_d._

A HISTORY OF EARLY CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE. By J. F. Bethune-Baker, M.A.
  _Demy 8vo._ 10_s._ 6_d._


                     =The Westminster Commentaries=
      General Editor, WALTER LOCK, D.D., Warden of Keble College,
   Dean Ireland’s Professor of Exegesis in the University of Oxford.

The object of each commentary is primarily exegetical, to interpret the
author’s meaning to the present generation. The editors will not deal,
except very subordinately, with questions of textual criticism or
philology; but, taking the English text in the Revised Version as their
basis, they will try to combine a hearty acceptance of critical
principles with loyalty to the Catholic Faith.

THE BOOK OF GENESIS. Edited with Introduction and Notes by S. R. Driver,
  D.D. _Fifth Edition._ _Demy_ 8_vo._ 10_s._ 6_d._

THE BOOK OF JOB. Edited by E. C. S. Gibson, D.D. _Second Edition. Demy
  8vo._ 6_s._

THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. Edited by R. B. Rackham, M.A. _Demy 8vo. Third
  Edition._ 10_s._ 6_d._

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PAUL THE APOSTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. Edited by H.
  L. Goudge, M.A. _Demy 8vo._ 6_s._

THE EPISTLE OF ST. JAMES. Edited with Introduction and Notes by R. J.
  Knowling, D.D. _Demy 8vo._ 6_s._

THE BOOK OF EZEKIEL. Edited H. A. Redpath, M.A., D.Litt. _Demy 8vo._
  10_s._ 6_d._

                            PART II.—FICTION

=Adderley (Hon. and Rev. James)=, Author of ‘Stephen Remarx.’ BEHOLD THE
  DAYS COME. _Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._

=Albanesi (E. Maria).= SUSANNAH AND ONE OTHER. _Fourth Edition. Cr.
  8vo._ 6_s._

THE BLUNDER OF AN INNOCENT. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

CAPRICIOUS CAROLINE. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

LOVE AND LOUISA. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

PETER, A PARASITE. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE BROWN EYES OF MARY. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

I KNOW A MAIDEN. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Anstey (F.).= Author of ‘Vice Versâ.’ A BAYARD FROM BENGAL. Illustrated
  by BERNARD PARTRIDGE. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._

=Bagot (Richard).= A ROMAN MYSTERY. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE PASSPORT. _Fourth Ed. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

TEMPTATION. _Second Ed. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

CASTING OF NETS. _Twelfth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

DONNA DIANA. _A New Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

LOVE’S PROXY. _A New Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Baring-Gould (S.).= ARMINELL. _Fifth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

URITH. _Fifth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

IN THE ROAR OF THE SEA. _Seventh Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

CHEAP JACK ZITA. _Fourth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

MARGERY OF QUETHER. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE QUEEN OF LOVE. _Fifth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

JACQUETTA. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

KITTY ALONE. _Fifth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

NOÉMI. Illustrated. _Fourth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE BROOM-SQUIRE. Illustrated. _Fifth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

DARTMOOR IDYLLS. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE PENNYCOMEQUICKS. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

GUAVAS THE TINNER. Illustrated. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

BLADYS OF THE STEWPONEY. Illustrated. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

PABO THE PRIEST. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

WINEFRED. Illustrated. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

ROYAL GEORGIE. Illustrated. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

MISS QUILLET. Illustrated. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

CHRIS OF ALL SORTS. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

IN DEWISLAND. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

LITTLE TU’PENNY. _A New Edition._ 6_d._

        See also Shilling Novels.

=Barnett (Edith A.).= A WILDERNESS WINNER. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Barr (James).= LAUGHING THROUGH A WILDERNESS. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Barr (Robert).= IN THE MIDST OF ALARMS. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE STRONG ARM. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE MUTABLE MANY. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE COUNTESS TEKLA. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE LADY ELECTRA. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE TEMPESTUOUS PETTICOAT. Illustrated. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

        See also Shilling Novels and S. Crane.

=Begbie (Harold).= THE ADVENTURES OF SIR JOHN SPARROW. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Belloc (Hilaire).= EMMANUEL BURDEN, MERCHANT. With 36 Illustrations by
  G. K. CHESTERTON. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Benson (E. F.).= DODO. _Fourth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE CAPSINA. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

        See also Shilling Novels.

=Benson (Margaret).= SUBJECT TO VANITY. _Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._

=Bretherton (Ralph).= THE MILL. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Burton (J. Bloundelle).= THE FATE OF VALSEC. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

A BRANDED NAME. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

        See also Shilling Novels.

=Capes (Bernard)=, Author of ‘The Lake of Wine.’ THE EXTRAORDINARY
  CONFESSIONS OF DIANA PLEASE. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

A JAY OF ITALY. _Fourth Ed. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

LOAVES AND FISHES. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

A ROGUE’S TRAGEDY. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Charlton (Randall).= MAVE. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Chesney (Weatherby).= THE TRAGEDY OF THE GREAT EMERALD. _Cr. 8vo._
  6_s._

THE MYSTERY OF A BUNGALOW. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

        See also Shilling Novels.

=Corelli (Marie).= A ROMANCE OF TWO WORLDS. _Twenty-Seventh Edition. Cr.
  8vo._ 6_s._

VENDETTA. _Twenty-Fourth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THELMA. _Thirty-Fifth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

ARDATH: THE STORY OF A DEAD SELF. _Seventeenth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE SOUL OF LILITH. _Fourteenth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

WORMWOOD. _Fifteenth Ed. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

BARABBAS: A DREAM OF THE WORLD’S TRAGEDY. _Forty-second Edition. Cr.
  8vo._ 6_s._

THE SORROWS OF SATAN. _Fifty-first Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE MASTER CHRISTIAN. _Tenth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

TEMPORAL POWER: A STUDY IN SUPREMACY. _150th Thousand. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

GOD’S GOOD MAN: A SIMPLE LOVE STORY. _Eleventh Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE MIGHTY ATOM. _Twenty-sixth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

BOY: a Sketch. _Ninth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

CAMEOS. _Twelfth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

JANE. _A New Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Cotes (Mrs. Everard).= See Sara Jeannette Duncan.

=Cotterell (Constance).= THE VIRGIN AND THE SCALES. Illustrated. _Second
  Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Crane (Stephen)= and =Barr (Robert)=. THE O’RUDDY. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Crockett (S. R.)=, Author of ‘The Raiders,’ etc. LOCHINVAR.
  Illustrated. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

  THE STANDARD BEARER. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Croker (B. M.).= THE OLD CANTONMENT. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

JOHANNA. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE HAPPY VALLEY. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

A NINE DAYS’ WONDER. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

PEGGY OF THE BARTONS. _Sixth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

ANGEL. _Fourth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

A STATE SECRET. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._

=Crosbie (Mary).= DISCIPLES. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Dawson (A. J.).= DANIEL WHYTE. _Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._

=Deane (Mary).= THE OTHER PAWN. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Doyle (A. Conan)=, Author of ‘Sherlock Holmes,’ ‘The White Company,’
  etc. ROUND THE RED LAMP. _Tenth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Duncan (Sara Jeannette)= (Mrs. Everard Cotes). THOSE DELIGHTFUL
  AMERICANS. Illustrated. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._ See also
  Shilling Novels.

=Findlater (J. H.).= THE GREEN GRAVES OF BALGOWRIE. _Fifth Edition. Cr.
  8vo._ 6_s._

THE LADDER TO THE STARS. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

        See also Shilling Novels.

=Findlater (Mary).= A NARROW WAY. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE ROSE OF JOY. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

A BLIND BIRD’S NEST. With 8 Illustrations. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

        See also Shilling Novels.

=Fitzpatrick (K.).= THE WEANS AT ROWALLAN. Illustrated. _Second Edition.
  Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Fitzstephen (Gerald).= MORE KIN THAN KIND. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Francis (M. E.).= STEPPING WESTWARD. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Fraser (Mrs. Hugh)=, Author of ‘The Stolen Emperor.’ THE SLAKING OF THE
  SWORD. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

IN THE SHADOW OF THE LORD. _Second Edition. Crown 8vo._ 6_s._

=Fuller-Maitland (Ella)=, Author of ‘The Day Book of Bethia Hardacre.’
  BLANCHE ESMEAD. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Gates (Eleanor)=, Author of ‘The Biography of a Prairie Girl.’ THE
  PLOW-WOMAN. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Gerard (Dorothea)=, Author of ‘Lady Baby.’ THE CONQUEST OF LONDON.
  _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

HOLY MATRIMONY. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

MADE OF MONEY. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE BRIDGE OF LIFE. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE IMPROBABLE IDYL. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

        See also Shilling Novels.

=Gissing (George)=, Author of ‘Demos,’ ‘In the Year of Jubilee,’ etc.
  THE TOWN TRAVELLER. _Second Ed. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE CROWN OF LIFE. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Gleig (Charles).= BUNTER’S CRUISE. Illustrated. _Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._

=Hamilton (M.)=, Author of ‘Cut Laurels.’ THE FIRST CLAIM. _Cr. 8vo._
  6_s._

=Harraden (Beatrice).= IN VARYING MOODS. _Fourteenth Edition. Cr. 8vo._
  6_s._

HILDA STRAFFORD and THE REMITTANCE MAN. _Twelfth Edition. Cr. 8vo._
  6_s._

THE SCHOLAR’S DAUGHTER. _Fourth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Harrod (F.) (Frances Forbes Robertson).= THE TAMING OF THE BRUTE. _Cr.
  8vo._ 6_s._

=Herbertson (Agnes G.).= PATIENCE DEAN. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Hichens (Robert).= THE PROPHET OF BERKELEY SQUARE. _Second Edition. Cr.
  8vo._ 6_s._

TONGUES OF CONSCIENCE. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

FELIX. _Fifth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE WOMAN WITH THE FAN. _Sixth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

BYEWAYS. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE GARDEN OF ALLAH. _Fifteenth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE BLACK SPANIEL. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE CALL OF THE BLOOD. _Seventh Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Hobbes (John Oliver)=, Author of ‘Robert Orange.’ THE SERIOUS WOOING.
  _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Hope (Anthony).= THE GOD IN THE CAR. _Tenth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

A CHANGE OF AIR. _Sixth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

A MAN OF MARK. _Fifth Ed. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE CHRONICLES OF COUNT ANTONIO. _Sixth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

PHROSO. Illustrated by H. R. MILLAR. _Sixth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

SIMON DALE. Illustrated. _Seventh Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE KING’S MIRROR. _Fourth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

QUISANTE. _Fourth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE DOLLY DIALOGUES. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

A SERVANT OF THE PUBLIC. Illustrated. _Fourth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Hope (Graham)=, Author of ‘A Cardinal and his Conscience,’ etc., etc.
  THE LADY OF LYTE. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Hough (Emerson).= THE MISSISSIPPI BUBBLE. Illustrated. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Housman (Clemence).= THE LIFE OF SIR AGLOVALE DE GALIS. _Cr. 8vo._
  6_s._

=Hyne (C. J. Cutcliffe)=, Author of ‘Captain Kettle.’ MR. HORROCKS,
  PURSER. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

PRINCE RUPERT, THE BUCCANEER. Illustrated. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Jacobs (W. W.).= MANY CARGOES. _Twenty-Ninth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._
  6_d._

SEA URCHINS. _Twelfth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._

A MASTER OF CRAFT. Illustrated. _Seventh Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._

LIGHT FREIGHTS. Illustrated. _Sixth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._

THE SKIPPER’S WOOING. _Eighth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._

DIALSTONE LANE. Illustrated. _Seventh Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._

ODD CRAFT. Illustrated. _Seventh Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._

AT SUNWICH PORT. Illustrated. _Seventh Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._

=James (Henry).= THE SOFT SIDE. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE BETTER SORT. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE AMBASSADORS. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE GOLDEN BOWL. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Keays (H. A. Mitchell).= HE THAT EATETH BREAD WITH ME. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Kester (Vaughan).= THE FORTUNES OF THE LANDRAYS. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Lawless (Hon. Emily).= WITH ESSEX IN IRELAND. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

        See also Shilling Novels.

=Le Queux (W.).= THE HUNCHBACK OF WESTMINSTER. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._
  6_s._

THE CLOSED BOOK. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE VALLEY OF THE SHADOW. Illustrated. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

BEHIND THE THRONE. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Levett-Yeats (S.).= ORRAIN. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=London (Jack)=, Author of ‘The Call of the Wild,’ ‘The Sea Wolf,’ etc.
  WHITE FANG. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Lucas (E. V.).= LISTENER’S LURE: An Oblique Narration. _Crown 8vo.
  Fourth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Lyall (Edna).= DERRICK VAUGHAN, NOVELIST. _42nd Thousand. Cr. 8vo._
  3_s._ 6_d._

=M’Carthy (Justin H.)=, Author of ‘If I were King.’ THE LADY OF LOYALTY
  HOUSE. Illustrated. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE DRYAD. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Macdonald (Ronald).= THE SEA MAID. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

A HUMAN TRINITY. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Macnaughtan (S.).= THE FORTUNE OF CHRISTINA MACNAB. _Third Edition. Cr.
  8vo._ 6_s._

=Malet (Lucas).= COLONEL ENDERBY’S WIFE. _Fourth Edition. Cr. 8vo._
  6_s._

A COUNSEL OF PERFECTION. _New Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE WAGES OF SIN. _Fifteenth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE CARISSIMA. _Fourth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE GATELESS BARRIER. _Fourth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE HISTORY OF SIR RICHARD CALMADY. _Seventh Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

        See also Books for Boys and Girls.

=Mann (Mrs. M. E.).= OLIVIA’S SUMMER. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

A LOST ESTATE. _A New Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE PARISH OF HILBY. _A New Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE PARISH NURSE. _Fourth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

GRAN’MA’S JANE. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

MRS. PETER HOWARD. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

A WINTER’S TALE. _A New Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

ONE ANOTHER’S BURDENS. _A New Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

ROSE AT HONEYPOT. _Third Ed. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._ See also Books for Boys and
  Girls.

THE MEMORIES OF RONALD LOVE. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE EGLAMORE PORTRAITS. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Marriott (Charles)=, Author of ‘The Column.’ GENEVRA. _Second Edition.
  Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Marsh (Richard).= THE TWICKENHAM PEERAGE. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._
  6_s._

THE MARQUIS OF PUTNEY. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

A DUEL. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

IN THE SERVICE OF LOVE. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

        See also Shilling Novels.

=Mason (A. E. W.)=, Author of ‘The Four Feathers,’ etc. CLEMENTINA.
  Illustrated. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Mathers (Helen)=, Author of ‘Comin’ thro’ the Rye.’ HONEY. _Fourth
  Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

GRIFF OF GRIFFITHSCOURT. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE FERRYMAN. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

TALLY-HO! _Fourth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Maxwell (W. B.)=, Author of ‘The Ragged Messenger.’ VIVIEN. _Eighth
  Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE RAGGED MESSENGER. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

FABULOUS FANCIES. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE GUARDED FLAME. _Seventh Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE COUNTESS OF MAYBURY. _A New Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

ODD LENGTHS. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Meade (L. T.).= DRIFT. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

RESURGAM. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

VICTORY. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

        See also Books for Boys and Girls.

=Melton (R.).= CÆSAR’S WIFE. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Meredith (Ellis).= HEART OF MY HEART. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Miller (Esther).= LIVING LIES. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

‘=Miss Molly=’ (The Author of). THE GREAT RECONCILER. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Mitford (Bertram).= THE SIGN OF THE SPIDER. Illustrated. _Sixth
  Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._

IN THE WHIRL OF THE RISING. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE RED DERELICT. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Montresor (F. F.)=, Author of ‘Into the Highways and Hedges.’ THE
  ALIEN. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Morrison (Arthur).= TALES OF MEAN STREETS. _Seventh Edition. Cr. 8vo._
  6_s._

A CHILD OF THE JAGO. _Fifth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

TO LONDON TOWN. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

CUNNING MURRELL. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE HOLE IN THE WALL. _Fourth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

DIVERS VANITIES. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Nesbit (E.).= (Mrs. E. Bland). THE RED HOUSE. Illustrated. _Fourth
  Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

        See also Shilling Novels.

=Norris (W. E.)=, Author of ‘Major Jim.’ HARRY AND URSULA. _Cr. 8vo._
  6_s._

=Ollivant (Alfred).= OWD BOB, THE GREY DOG OF KENMUIR. _Ninth Edition.
  Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Oppenheim (E. Phillips).= MASTER OF MEN. _Fourth Edition. Cr. 8vo._
  6_s._

=Oxenham (John)=, Author of ‘Barbe of Grand Bayou.’ A WEAVER OF WEBS.
  _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE GATE OF THE DESERT. _Fourth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

PROFIT AND LOSS. With a Frontispiece in photogravure by HAROLD COPPING.
  _Fourth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE LONG ROAD. With a Frontispiece by HAROLD COPPING. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Pain (Barry).= LINDLEY KAYS. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Parker (Gilbert).= PIERRE AND HIS PEOPLE. _Sixth Edition. Cr. 8vo._
  6_s._

MRS. FALCHION. _Fifth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE TRANSLATION OF A SAVAGE. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE TRAIL OF THE SWORD. Illustrated. _Ninth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

WHEN VALMOND CAME TO PONTIAC: The Story of a Lost Napoleon. _Fifth
  Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

AN ADVENTURER OF THE NORTH. The Last Adventures of ‘Pretty Pierre.’
  _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE SEATS OF THE MIGHTY. Illustrated. _Fourteenth Edition. Cr. 8vo._
  6_s._

THE BATTLE OF THE STRONG: a Romance of Two Kingdoms. Illustrated. _Fifth
  Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE POMP OF THE LAVILETTES. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._

=Pemberton (Max).= THE FOOTSTEPS OF A THRONE. Illustrated. _Third
  Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

I CROWN THEE KING. With Illustrations by Frank Dadd and A. Forrestier.
  _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Phillpotts (Eden).= LYING PROPHETS. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

CHILDREN OF THE MIST. _Fifth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE HUMAN BOY. With a Frontispiece. _Fourth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

SONS OF THE MORNING. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE RIVER. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE AMERICAN PRISONER. _Fourth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE SECRET WOMAN. _Fourth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

KNOCK AT A VENTURE. With a Frontispiece. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE PORTREEVE. _Fourth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE POACHER’S WIFE. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

        See also Shilling Novels.

=Pickthall (Marmaduke).= SAÏD THE FISHERMAN. _Fifth Edition. Cr. 8vo._
  6_s._

BRENDLE. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE HOUSE OF ISLAM. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

‘=Q.=’ Author of ‘Dead Man’s Rock.’ THE WHITE WOLF. _Second Edition. Cr.
  8vo._ 6_s._

THE MAYOR OF TROY. _Fourth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

MERRY GARDEN AND OTHER STORIES. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Rawson (Maud Stepney).= Author of ‘A Lady of the Regency.’ ‘The
  Labourer’s Comedy,’ etc. THE ENCHANTED GARDEN. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Rhys (Grace).= THE WOOING OF SHEILA. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Ridge (W. Pett).= LOST PROPERTY. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

ERB. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

A SON OF THE STATE. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._

A BREAKER OF LAWS. _A New Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._

MRS. GALER’S BUSINESS. Illustrated. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

SECRETARY TO BAYNE, M.P. _Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._

THE WICKHAMSES. _Fourth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Roberts (C. G. D.).= THE HEART OF THE ANCIENT WOOD. _Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._
  6_d._

=Russell (W. Clark).= MY DANISH SWEETHEART. Illustrated. _Fifth Edition.
  Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

HIS ISLAND PRINCESS. Illustrated. _Second Edition. Cr. 6vo._ 6_s._

ABANDONED. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

        See also Books for Boys and Girls.

=Sergeant (Adeline).= BARBARA’S MONEY. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE PROGRESS OF RACHAEL. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE MYSTERY OF THE MOAT. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE COMING OF THE RANDOLPHS. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

        See also Shilling Novels.

=Shannon. (W. F.).= THE MESS DECK. _Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._

        See also Shilling Novels.

=Shelley (Bertha).= ENDERBY. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Sidgwick (Mrs. Alfred)=, Author of ‘Cynthia’s Way.’ THE KINSMAN. With 8
  Illustrations by C. E. BROCK. _Second Ed. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Sonnichsen (Albert).= DEEP-SEA VAGABONDS. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Sunbury (George).= THE HA’PENNY MILLIONAIRE. _Cr. 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._

=Thompson (Vance).= SPINNERS OF LIFE. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Urquhart (M.).= A TRAGEDY IN COMMONPLACE. _Second Ed. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Waineman (Paul).= THE SONG OF THE FOREST. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

A HEROINE FROM FINLAND. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

        See also Shilling Novels.

=Waltz (E. C.).= THE ANCIENT LANDMARK: A Kentucky Romance. _Cr. 8vo._
  6_s._

=Watson (H. B. Marriott).= ALARUMS AND EXCURSIONS. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

CAPTAIN FORTUNE. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

TWISTED EGLANTINE. With 8 Illustrations by FRANK CRAIG. _Third Edition.
  Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE HIGH TOBY. With a Frontispiece. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

A MIDSUMMER DAY’S DREAM. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

        See also Shilling Novels.

=Wells (H. G.).= THE SEA LADY. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Weyman (Stanley)=, Author of ‘A Gentleman of France.’ UNDER THE RED
  ROBE. With Illustrations by R. C. WOODVILLE. _Twentieth Edition. Cr.
  8vo._ 6_s._

=White (Stewart E.)=, Author of ‘The Blazed Trail.’ CONJUROR’S HOUSE. A
  Romance of the Free Trail. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=White (Percy).= THE SYSTEM. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE PATIENT MAN. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Williams (Margery).= THE BAR. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Williamson (Mrs. C. N.)=, Author of ‘The Barnstormers.’ THE ADVENTURE
  OF PRINCESS SYLVIA. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE WOMAN WHO DARED. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE SEA COULD TELL. _Second Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

THE CASTLE OF THE SHADOWS. _Third Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

PAPA. _Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Williamson (C. N. and A. M.).= THE LIGHTNING CONDUCTOR: Being the
  Romance of a Motor Car. Illustrated. _Fifteenth Edition. Cr. 8vo._
  6_s._

THE PRINCESS PASSES. Illustrated. _Seventh Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

MY FRIEND THE CHAUFFEUR. With 16 Illustrations. _Eighth Edition. Cr.
  8vo._ 6_s._

THE CAR OF DESTINY AND ITS ERRAND IN SPAIN. _Third Edition._
  Illustrated.

LADY BETTY ACROSS THE WATER. _Sixth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._

=Wyllarde (Dolf)=, Author of ‘Uriah the Hittite.’ THE PATHWAY OF THE
  PIONEER (Nous Autres). _Fourth Edition. Cr. 8vo._ 6_s._


                      =Methuen’s Shilling Novels=
                     _Cr. 8vo. Cloth_, 1_s._ _net_.

=Author of ‘Miss Molly.’= THE GREAT RECONCILER.

=Balfour (Andrew).= VENGEANCE IS MINE.

TO ARMS.

=Baring-Gould (S.).= MRS. CURGENVEN OF CURGENVEN.

DOMITIA.

THE FROBISHERS.

CHRIS OF ALL SORTS.

DARTMOOR IDYLLS.

=Barlow (Jane),= Author of ‘Irish Idylls.’ FROM THE EAST UNTO THE WEST

A CREEL OF IRISH STORIES.

THE FOUNDING OF FORTUNES.

THE LAND OF THE SHAMROCK.

=Barr (Robert).= THE VICTORS.

=Bartram (George).= THIRTEEN EVENINGS.

=Benson (E. F.)=, Author of ‘Dodo.’ THE CAPSINA.

=Bowles (G. Stewart).= A STRETCH OFF THE LAND.

=Brooke (Emma).= THE POET’S CHILD.

=Bullock (Shan F.).= THE BARRYS.

THE CHARMER.

THE SQUIREEN.

THE RED LEAGUERS.

=Burton (J. Bloundelle).= ACROSS THE SALT SEAS.

THE CLASH OF ARMS.

DENOUNCED.

FORTUNE’S MY FOE.

A BRANDED NAME.

=Capes (Bernard).= AT A WINTER’S FIRE.

=Chesney (Weatherby).= THE BAPTIST RING.

THE BRANDED PRINCE.

THE FOUNDERED GALLEON.

JOHN TOPP.

THE MYSTERY OF A BUNGALOW.

=Clifford (Mrs. W. K.).= A FLASH OF SUMMER.

=Cobb, Thomas.= A CHANGE OF FACE.

=Collingwood (Harry).= THE DOCTOR OF THE ‘JULIET.’

=Cornford (L. Cope).= SONS OF ADVERSITY.

=Cotterell (Constance).= THE VIRGIN AND THE SCALES.

=Crane (Stephen).= WOUNDS IN THE RAIN.

=Denny (C. E.).= THE ROMANCE OF UPFOLD MANOR.

=Dickson (Harris).= THE BLACK WOLF’S BREED.

=Dickinson (Evelyn).= THE SIN OF ANGELS.

*=Duncan (Sara J.).= THE POOL IN THE DESERT.

A VOYAGE OF CONSOLATION. Illustrated.

=Embree (C. F.).= A HEART OF FLAME. Illustrated.

=Fenn (G. Manville).= AN ELECTRIC SPARK.

A DOUBLE KNOT.

=Findlater (Jane H.).= A DAUGHTER OF STRIFE.

=Findlater (Mary).= OVER THE HILLS.

=Fitzstephen (G.).= MORE KIN THAN KIND.

=Fletcher (J. S.).= DAVID MARCH.

LUCAN THE DREAMER.

=Forrest (R. E.).= THE SWORD OF AZRAEL.

=Francis (M. E.).= MISS ERIN.

=Gallon (Tom).= RICKERBY’S FOLLY.

=Gerard (Dorothea).= THINGS THAT HAVE HAPPENED.

THE CONQUEST OF LONDON.

THE SUPREME CRIME.

=Gilchrist (R. Murray).= WILLOWBRAKE.

=Glanville (Ernest).= THE DESPATCH RIDER.

THE LOST REGIMENT.

THE KLOOF BRIDE.

THE INCA’S TREASURE.

=Gordon (Julien).= MRS. CLYDE.

WORLD’S PEOPLE.

=Goss (C. F.).= THE REDEMPTION OF DAVID CORSON.

=Gray (E. M’Queen).= MY STEWARDSHIP.

=Hales (A. G.).= JAIR THE APOSTATE.

=Hamilton (Lord Ernest).= MARY HAMILTON.

=Harrison (Mrs. Burton).= A PRINCESS OF THE HILLS. Illustrated.

=Hooper (I.).= THE SINGER OF MARLY.

=Hough (Emerson).= THE MISSISSIPPI BUBBLE.

=‘Iota’ (Mrs. Caffyn).= ANNE MAULEVERER.

=Jepson (Edgar).= THE KEEPERS OF THE PEOPLE.

=Keary (C. F.).= THE JOURNALIST.

=Kelly (Florence Finch).= WITH HOOPS OF STEEL.

=Langbridge (V.) and Bourne (C. H.).= THE VALLEY OF INHERITANCE.

=Lawless (Hon. Emily).= MAELCHO.

=Linden (Annie).= A WOMAN OF SENTIMENT.

=Lorimer (Norma).= JOSIAH’S WIFE.

=Lush (Charles K.).= THE AUTOCRATS.

=Macdonell (Anne).= THE STORY OF TERESA.

=Macgrath (Harold).= THE PUPPET CROWN.

=Mackle (Pauline Bradford).= THE VOICE IN THE DESERT.

=Marsh (Richard).= THE SEEN AND THE UNSEEN.

GARNERED.

A METAMORPHOSIS.

MARVELS AND MYSTERIES.

BOTH SIDES OF THE VEIL.

=Mayall (J. W.).= THE CYNIC AND THE SYREN.

=Meade (L. T.).= RESURGAM.

=Monkhouse (Allan).= LOVE IN A LIFE.

=Moore (Arthur).= THE KNIGHT PUNCTILIOUS.

=Nesbit, E. (Mrs. Bland).= THE LITERARY SENSE.

=Norris (W. E.).= AN OCTAVE.

MATTHEW AUSTIN.

THE DESPOTIC LADY.

=Oliphant (Mrs.).= THE LADY’S WALK.

SIR ROBERT’S FORTUNE.

THE TWO MARY’S.

=Pendered (M. L.).= AN ENGLISHMAN.

=Penny (Mrs. Frank).= A MIXED MARRIAGE.

=Phillpotts (Eden).= THE STRIKING HOURS.

FANCY FREE.

=Pryce (Richard).= TIME AND THE WOMAN.

=Randall (John).= AUNT BETHIA’S BUTTON.

=Raymond (Walter).= FORTUNE’S DARLING.

=Rayner (Olive Pratt).= ROSALBA.

=Rhys (Grace).= THE DIVERTED VILLAGE.

=Rickert (Edith).= OUT OF THE CYPRESS SWAMP.

=Roberton (M. H.).= A GALLANT QUAKER.

=Russell, (W. Clark).= ABANDONED.

=Saunders (Marshall).= ROSE À CHARLITTE.

=Sergeant (Adeline).= ACCUSED AND ACCUSER.

BARBARA’S MONEY.

THE ENTHUSIAST.

A GREAT LADY.

THE LOVE THAT OVERCAME.

THE MASTER OF BEECHWOOD.

UNDER SUSPICION.

THE YELLOW DIAMOND.

THE MYSTERY OF THE MOAT.

THE PROGRESS OF RACHAEL.

=Shannon (W. F.).= JIM TWELVES.

=Stephens (R. N.).= AN ENEMY OF THE KING.

=Strain (E. H.).= ELMSLIE’S DRAG NET.

=Stringer (Arthur).= THE SILVER POPPY.

=Stuart (Esmè).= CHRISTALLA.

A WOMAN OF FORTY.

=Sutherland (Duchess of).= ONE HOUR AND THE NEXT.

=Swan (Annie).= LOVE GROWN COLD.

=Swift (Benjamin).= SORDON.

SIREN CITY.

=Tanqueray (Mrs. B. M.).= THE ROYAL QUAKER.

=Thompson (Vance).= SPINNERS OF LIFE.

=Trafford-Taunton (Mrs. E. W.).= SILENT DOMINION.

=Upward (Allen).= ATHELSTANE FORD.

=Waineman (Paul).= A HEROINE FROM FINLAND.

BY A FINNISH LAKE.

=Watson (H. B. Marriott).= THE SKIRTS OF HAPPY CHANCE.

=‘Zack.=’ TALES OF DUNSTABLE WEIR.


                       =Books for Boys and Girls=
                 _Illustrated. Crown 8vo._ 3_s._ 6_d._

THE GETTING WELL OF DOROTHY. By Mrs. W. K. Clifford. _Second Edition._

ONLY A GUARD-ROOM DOG. By Edith E. Cuthell.

THE DOCTOR OF THE JULIET. By Harry Collingwood.

LITTLE PETER. By Lucas Malet. _Second Edition._

MASTER ROCKAFELLAR’S VOYAGE. By W. Clark Russell. _Third Edition._

THE SECRET OF MADAME DE MONLUC. By the Author of “Mdlle. Mori.”

SYD BELTON: Or, the Boy who would not go to Sea. By G. Manville Fenn.

THE RED GRANGE. By Mrs. Molesworth.

A GIRL OF THE PEOPLE. By L. T. Meade. _Second Edition._

HEPSY GIPSY. By L. T. Meade. 2_s._ 6_d._

THE HONOURABLE MISS. By L. T. Meade. _Second Edition._

THERE WAS ONCE A PRINCE. By Mrs. M. E. Mann.

WHEN ARNOLD COMES HOME. By Mrs. M. E. Mann.


                    =The Novels of Alexandre Dumas=
                _Price_ 6_d._    _Double Volumes_, 1_s._

ACTÉ.

THE ADVENTURES OF CAPTAIN PAMPHILE.

AMAURY.

THE BIRD OF FATE.

THE BLACK TULIP.

THE CASTLE OF EPPSTEIN.

CATHERINE BLUM.

CECILE.

THE CHEVALIER D’HARMENTAL. Double volume.

CONSCIENCE.

THE CONVICT’S SON.

THE CORSICAN BROTHERS; and OTHO THE ARCHER.

CROP-EARED JACQUOT.

THE FENCING MASTER.

FERNANDE.

GABRIEL LAMBERT.

GEORGES.

THE GREAT MASSACRE. Being the first part of Queen Margot.

HENRI DE NAVARRE. Being the second part of Queen Margot.

THE LADY OF MONSOREAU.

LOUISE DE LA VALLIÈRE. Being the first part of THE VICOMTE DE
  BRAGELONNE. Double Volume.

MAÎTRE ADAM.

THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK. Being the second part of THE VICOMTE DE
  BRAGELONNE. Double volume.

THE MOUTH OF HELL.

NANON. Double volume.

PAULINE; PASCAL BRUNO; and BONTEKOE.

PÈRE LA RUINE.

THE PRINCE OF THIEVES.

THE REGENT’S DAUGHTER.

THE REMINISCENCES OF ANTONY.

ROBIN HOOD.

THE SNOWBALL and SULTANETTA.

SYLVANDIRE.

TALES OF THE SUPERNATURAL.

THE THREE MUSKETEERS. With a long Introduction by Andrew Lang. Double
  volume.

TWENTY YEARS AFTER. Double volume.

THE WILD DUCK SHOOTER.

THE WOLF-LEADER.


                       =Methuen’s Sixpenny Books=

=Albanesi (E. M.).= LOVE AND LOUISA.

=Austen (Jane).= PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

=Bagot (Richard).= A ROMAN MYSTERY.

=Balfour (Andrew).= BY STROKE OF SWORD.

=Baring-Gould (S.).= FURZE BLOOM.

CHEAP JACK ZITA.

KITTY ALONE.

URITH.

THE BROOM SQUIRE.

IN THE ROAR OF THE SEA.

NOÉMI.

A BOOK OF FAIRY TALES. Illustrated.

LITTLE TU’PENNY.

THE FROBISHERS.

WINEFRED.

=Barr (Robert).= JENNIE BAXTER, JOURNALIST.

IN THE MIDST OF ALARMS.

THE COUNTESS TEKLA.

THE MUTABLE MANY.

=Benson (E. F.).= DODO.

=Brontë (Charlotte).= SHIRLEY.

=Brownell (C. L.).= THE HEART OF JAPAN.

=Burton (J. Bloundelle).= ACROSS THE SALT SEAS.

=Caffyn (Mrs.)=, (‘Iota). ANNE MAULEVERER.

=Capes (Bernard).= THE LAKE OF WINE.

=Clifford (Mrs. W. K.).= A FLASH OF SUMMER.

MRS. KEITH’S CRIME.

=Connell (F. Norreys).= THE NIGGER KNIGHTS.

=Corbett (Julian).= A BUSINESS IN GREAT WATERS.

=Croker (Mrs. B. M.).= PEGGY OF THE BARTONS.

A STATE SECRET.

ANGEL.

JOHANNA.

=Dante (Alighieri).= THE VISION OF DANTE (Cary).

=Doyle (A. Conan).= ROUND THE RED LAMP.

=Duncan (Sara Jeannette).= A VOYAGE OF CONSOLATION.

THOSE DELIGHTFUL AMERICANS.

=Eliot (George).= THE MILL ON THE FLOSS.

=Findlater (Jane H.).= THE GREEN GRAVES OF BALGOWRIE.

=Gallon (Tom).= RICKERBY’S FOLLY.

=Gaskell (Mrs.).= CRANFORD.

MARY BARTON.

NORTH AND SOUTH.

=Gerard (Dorothea).= HOLY MATRIMONY.

THE CONQUEST OF LONDON.

MADE OF MONEY.

=Gissing (George).= THE TOWN TRAVELLER.

THE CROWN OF LIFE.

=Glanville (Ernest).= THE INCA’S TREASURE.

THE KLOOF BRIDE.

=Gleig (Charles).= BUNTER’S CRUISE.

=Grimm (The Brothers).= GRIMM’S FAIRY TALES. Illustrated.

=Hope (Anthony).= A MAN OF MARK.

A CHANGE OF AIR.

THE CHRONICLES OF COUNT ANTONIO.

PHROSO.

THE DOLLY DIALOGUES.

=Hornung (E. W.).= DEAD MEN TELL NO TALES.

=Ingraham (J. H.).= THE THRONE OF DAVID.

=Le Queux (W.).= THE HUNCHBACK OF WESTMINSTER.

=Levett-Yeats (S. K.).= THE TRAITOR’S WAY.

=Linton (E. Lynn).= THE TRUE HISTORY OF JOSHUA DAVIDSON.

=Lyall (Edna).= DERRICK VAUGHAN.

=Malet (Lucas).= THE CARISSIMA.

A COUNSEL OF PERFECTION.

=Mann (Mrs. M. E.).= MRS. PETER HOWARD.

A LOST ESTATE.

THE CEDAR STAR.

ONE ANOTHER’S BURDENS.

=Marchmont (A. W.).= MISER HOADLEY’S SECRET.

A MOMENT’S ERROR.

=Marryat (Captain).= PETER SIMPLE.

JACOB FAITHFUL.

=Marsh (Richard).= THE TWICKENHAM PEERAGE.

THE GODDESS.

THE JOSS.

A METAMORPHOSIS.

=Mason (A. E. W.).= CLEMENTINA.

=Mathers (Helen).= HONEY.

GRIFF OF GRIFFITHSCOURT.

SAM’S SWEETHEART.

=Meade (Mrs. L. T.).= DRIFT.

=Mitford (Bertram).= THE SIGN OF THE SPIDER.

=Montresor (F. F.).= THE ALIEN.

=Moore (Arthur).= THE GAY DECEIVERS.

=Morrison (Arthur).= THE HOLE IN THE WALL.

=Nesbit (E.).= THE RED HOUSE.

=Norris (W. E.).= HIS GRACE.

GILES INGILBY.

THE CREDIT OF THE COUNTY.

LORD LEONARD.

MATTHEW AUSTIN.

CLARISSA FURIOSA.

=Oliphant (Mrs.).= THE LADY’S WALK.

SIR ROBERT’S FORTUNE.

THE PRODIGALS.

=Oppenheim (E. Phillips).= MASTER OF MEN.

=Parker (Gilbert).= THE POMP OF THE LAVILETTES.

WHEN VALMOND CAME TO PONTIAC.

THE TRAIL OF THE SWORD.

=Pemberton (Max).= THE FOOTSTEPS OF A THRONE.

I CROWN THEE KING.

=Phillpotts (Eden).= THE HUMAN BOY.

CHILDREN OF THE MIST.

*‘=Q.=’ THE WHITE WOLF.

=Ridge (W. Pett).= A SON OF THE STATE.

LOST PROPERTY.

GEORGE AND THE GENERAL.

=Russell (W. Clark).= A MARRIAGE AT SEA.

ABANDONED.

MY DANISH SWEETHEART.

HIS ISLAND PRINCESS.

=Sergeant (Adeline).= THE MASTER OF BEECHWOOD.

BARBARA’S MONEY.

THE YELLOW DIAMOND.

THE LOVE THAT OVERCAME.

=Surtees (R. S.).= HANDLEY CROSS. Illustrated.

MR. SPONGE’S SPORTING TOUR. Illustrated.

ASK MAMMA. Illustrated.

=Valentine (Major E. S.).= VELDT AND LAAGER.

=Walford (Mrs. L. B.).= MR. SMITH.

COUSINS.

THE BABY’S GRANDMOTHER.

=Wallace (General Lew).= BEN-HUR.

THE FAIR GOD.

=Watson (H. B. Marriot).= THE ADVENTURERS.

=Weekes (A. B.).= PRISONERS OF WAR.

=Wells (H. G.).= THE STOLEN BACILLUS.

=White (Percy).= A PASSIONATE PILGRIM.

                          Transcriber’s Notes

    Obvious typographical errors have been corrected silently.

    Note 1 — 3.10^{16} was changed to 3×10^{16} in accord with modern
    usage.

    Note 2 — MARAGE changed to MARRIAGE after checking title of book in
    web search

    Note 3 — [in catalog at back pages 27-28] Markings for Vol. numbers
    in this section were standardized at all small-mixed-caps.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Substance of Faith Allied with
Science (6th Ed.), by Oliver Lodge

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SUBSTANCE OF FAITH ***

***** This file should be named 50330-0.txt or 50330-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/0/3/3/50330/

Produced by Charlene Taylor, Elizabeth Oscanyan, Bryan
Ness and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/Canadian
Libraries)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

